**Google Cloud Run**

**Cloud Run and Cloud Run for Anthos**

- Cloud Run: It is "Container to production in seconds".
- Each cloud run service has a unique endpoint and autoscales deployed containers.
- Enable the cloud run api before using it.
- This cloud run is build on the top of an open standard called Knative.
- Fully managed serverless platform for containerized applications.
  - Zero infrastructure management.
  - Pay only for the resources you use.
- Fully integrated end-to-end developer experience.
  - No limitations in languages, binaries and dependencies.
  - Easily portable because of the container based architecture.
- Cloud run integrates well with Cloud Code, Cloud Build, Cloud Monitoring and Cloud Logging integrations.
- When we use Kubernetes we need to create the cluster first and then deploy our microservices to the clusters.
  - Go to create service and select the container image from container registry.
  - You can even continuously deploy new revisions from a source repository.
  - You need to specify the service name and region. These both fields cannot be changed later on.
  - You can look into CPU allocation and pricing where you can choose between Cost Less(CPU is only allocated during request processing) and More Costly(CPU is always allocated).
  - You need to specify the minimum number of instances and maximum number of instances. For better performance, you can set the minimum number of instances to 1 to avoid cold starts.
  - Choose the iNgress type as Internal or External or all traffic.
  - You can even check the authentication Where you can choose between Allow Unauthenticated invocations or Require Authentication.
  - You can now create the service.
- You can even revise the service by going to the service and clicking on the edit button. Here you can choose whether to route all the traffic to the new revision or to route a percentage of the traffic to the new revision.
- **Anthos** Run Kubernetes Cluster anywhere
  - Cloud, Multi-cloud, and on-premises
  - Cloud Run for Anthos: Deploy your workloads to anthos clusters running on-premises or on Google cloud.

**Cloud Run from the command line**

- Deploy a new container: *gcloud run deploy SERVICE_NAME --image IMAGE_URL --revision-suffix v1* First Deployment creates a service and first revision. Next deployments for the same service creates new revisions.
- List available revisions: *gcloud run revisions list*
- Adjust traffic assignments: *gcloud run services update-traffic myservice --to-revisions=v2=10,v1=90*

*Notes:*
- Cloud Functions is recommended when you want to react to events like a file upload to cloud storage.
- Anthos enables you to run your kubernetes clusters accross multiple platforms(multi-cloud and on-prem).