**Cloud Functions Gen 2**

- 2 Product Versions:
  - Cloud Functions(1st Gen): First generation
  - Cloud Functions(2nd Gen): New version built on the top of cloud run and eventarc.
- It is recommended to use Cloud Functions Gen 2 because of the key enhancements in the new version.
  - Longer Request Timeout: Upto 60 minutes(3600 seconds) for HTTP-triggered functions.
  - Larger Instance Sizes: Upto 16GiB RAM with 4 vCPUs (v1: upto 8 GiB RAM with 2 vCPUs).
  - Concurrency: Upto 1000 concurrent requests per function instance (v1: 1 concurrent request per function instance).
  - Multiple Function Revisions and traffic splitting support. (v1: Not Supported)
  - Support for 90+ event types- Enabled by Eventarc. (v1: Only 7)
  - Creating 2nd Gen Cloud Functions:
    - Choose the Environment as 1st Gen or 2nd Gen.
    - Enter the function name and specify the region.
    - Choose the type of trigger and then Select from the available options of authentication: Allow Unauthenticated invocations or Require Authentication.
    - Choose the runtime as Node.js 14 or Python 3.9 or any other of your choice.
    - Enter the function to execute and then click on the create button.
    - As you will create the function you can see the creating build and service status as pending.
    - Once the function is created you can see the function details like url, trigger, runtime, memory allocated, timeout, concurrency, metrics, etc.
    - You can even check the logs of the function by clicking on the logs button.
    - If you want to make changes to the function you can click on the edit button and then make the changes and click on the save button.
    - For deploying the another revision of the function you can click on the deploy button and your new revision will be deployed with the same trigger and url.
    - You can even check the metrics in cloud run for the fuction you just created as it runs above the cloud run platform. you can check the metrics like CPU, Memory, Request Count, etc. This option is just available for the 2nd Gen functions.
    - You can even look for your revisions in the revisions tab of the cloud run service.
    - You can manage the traffic for your different revisions by clicking on the traffic tab and then you can choose the percentage of traffic to be routed to each revision.

**Cloud Functions- Scaling and Concurrency**

- Typical Serverless Functions Architecture:
  - Auto Scaling: As new invocations come in, new function instances are created.
  - One function instance handles only one request at a time.
  - 3 concurrent function invocations => 3 function instances.
    - If a function instance occurs while existing invocations are in progress, a new function instance will be created.
    - However, a function instance that completed execution may be reused for a future requests.
    - The above two lines can be concluded as the lines of a fastfood counter as one person orders at the counter the number of counters increase with the count of people's seeking service and to get the service.
  - Typical Problem: Cold Start:
    - New function instance initialization from scratch can take some time.
    - (Solution) There is a solution to the above problem which is to configure the minimum number of instances to reduce the cold start time, but this solution comes at a cost as you need to pay for the idle instances which typically increases the cost.
  - *1st* Generation uses the typical serverless functions architecture.
  - *2nd* Generation adds a very important new feature:
    - One function instance can handle multiple requests at the same time.
      - Concurrency: How many concurrent invocations can one function instance handle? (**Maximum 1000**).
      - (IMPORTANT) Your function code should be safe to execute concurrently.

**Cloud Functions- Deploying using gcloud**

- gcloud functions deploy [name]
  - --docker-registry(registry to store the function's docker image).
    - Default: container registry
    - Alternative: Artifact Registry
  - --docker repository(Repository to store the function's docker images).
    - Example:(projects/${PROJECT_ID}/locations/${LOCATION}/repositories/${REPOSITORY_NAME})
  - --gen2 (Use 2nd gen. If you do not give this option, 1st gen will be used).
  - --runtime (nodejs,python,java,....)
  - --service-account (Service account to use for the function)
    - 1st GEN: defaultL: App Engine default service account-PROJECT_ID@appspot.gserviceaccount.com
    - 2nd GEN: Default compute service account-PROJECT_NO-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com
  - --timeout (function execution time)
  - --max-instances (Function execution exceeding max-instances times out)
  - --min-instances (avoid cold start at higher costs)

- //Deploy PubSub Triggered gen2 function from cloud storage bucket
  - gcloud functions deploy my-pubsub-function \
    --gen2 \
    --region=europe-west1 \
    --runtime=nodejs16 \
    --source=gs://my-source-bucket/source.zip \
    --trigger-topic=my-pubsub-topic

- gcloud functions deploy [name]
  - --source
    - Zip file from google cloud storage(gs://my-source-bucket/source.zip)(OR)
    - Source Repo (https://URL/projects/${PROJECT_ID}/repos/${REPO_NAME})(OR)
    - Local file system
  - --trigger-bucket (OR) --trigger-http (OR) --trigger-topic (OR) --trigger-event-filters (only in gen2- Eventarc matching criteria for the trigger)

  **Cloud Functions- Best Practices**

- To avoid cold start, set min-instances (this will incur into higher costs).
  - Minimize dependencies (loading dependencies increases the initialization time).
  - Configure the maximum number of instances (protect from abnormally high request levels).
  - Use cloud endpoints (or Apigee or API gateway) for versioning
  - Use cloud run (& Cloud Functions Gen 2) revisions for safer releases.
    - Configure which revisions should receive traffic and how much.(Traffic splitting)
    - You can even rollback to the previous revision if the new revision is not working as expected.
  - Use secret manager to securely store secrets (example: API keys, passwords, etc).
  - Use *Individual service account* for each function you roll out.
    - If a function wants to invoke an another function, it should use its own service account with the roles/cloudfunctions.invoker role.
  - Manage dependencies using your language specific package manager.
    - Node.js: npm
    - Python: pip
    - Java: Maven
    - Go: Go Modules
  