**Google Cloud KMS**

**Understanding Data States**

- *Encryption*: When we move our data from one place to another, we need to encrypt it to protect it from unauthorized access.
- Data at Rest: Stored on a device or a backup.
  - Examples: Data on a hard disk, in a database, backups and archives.
- Data in Motion: Being transferred across a network. (also said as Data in Transit)
  - Examples: Data copied from on-premise to cloud storage or An application talking to a database.
  - Two types:
    - In and out of cloud (from internet): You can have secuurity at a lower level as compared within the cloud data transfers.
    - within cloud (from one service to another): You can control over the whole data transfer process.
- Data in Use: Active data processed in a non-persistent state.
  - Example: Data in your memory.

**Understanding Encryption: Symmetric and Asymmetric**

- Encryption: If you store data as it is, what would happen if an unauthorized entity gets access to it.
  - Imagine losing an unencrypted hard disk.
- *First Law of Security*: Defense in Depth
- Typically enterprises encrypt data at rest and in motion or all the data they have.
  - Data on your hard disks, databases and file servers.
- Is it sufficient if you encrypt data at rest?
  - No. Encrypt data in transit- between application to database as well.

**Symmetric Encryption**

- Symmetric Encryption: Symmetric encryption algorithm use the same key for encryption and decryption.
  - Key Factor 1: Choose the right encryption algorithm.
  - Key Factor 2: How do we secure the encrytion key?
  - Key Factor 3: How do we share the encryption key?

**Asymmetric Encryption**

- There are two keys in asymmetric encryption named public key and private key. This type of encryption is also called as public key cryptography.
- Encrypt data with public key and decrypt with private key.
- You can share the public key with anyone, but keep the private key with you or secret.
- You can encrypt data with your private key and decrypt with your public key.

**Cloud KMS**

- You can create and manage cryptographic keys (symmetric and asymmetric) in the cloud.
- Control their use in your applications and gcp services.
- Provides an API to encrypt, decrypt or sign data.
- Use existing cryptographic keys created on premises.
- Integrates with almost all gcp services that need data encryption.
  - Google managed key: No configuration required
  - Customer managed key: Use key from KMS
  - Customer Supplied key: Provide your own key

**Practice KMS**

- Go to KMS and click on create key ring.
- Give a name to the key ring and choose the location.
- Click on create.
- Here now you have options like what type of key you want to create.
- You can choose between Generated Key(A standard customer managed encryption key. The key material will be generated by you.) and Imported Key(For importing your key materials to GCP) ot Exteranlly managed key.
- For now choose a name for the key and choose from the drop down menu regarding the protection level of the same, Whether you want to use it for HSM or Software.
- Choose the purpose of the key, whether you want to use it for encryption or decryption.
- Click on create.
- As you have created an encryption key, you can now use it to encrypt and decrypt data. but you need to define the permisions to do so.
- This permission is defined to the service account.