**Google Cloud Block and File Storage**

**Storage Options**

- Block Storage and File Storage
- Block Storage: The type of storage of your hard disk.
- File Storage: A file share to share a set of files with your collegues in an enterprise.

**Block Storage**

- Typically, one block storage device can be connected to one virtual server.
- (Exceptions) You can attach read only block devices with multiple virtual servers and *certain cloud providers are exploring multi-writer disks as well*.
- However, you can attach multiple different block storage devices to a single virtual server.
- This can be used as:
  - Direct-attached storage (DAS)- Similar to a hard disk.
  - Storage area network (SAN)- High-speed network connecting a pool of storage devices. Example: Oracle and Microsoft SQL server

**File Storage**

- Media workflow need huge shared storage for supporting processes like video editing, audio editing, and 3D rendering.
- Enterprise users need a quick way to share files in a secure and organized way.
- These file shares are shared by multiple virtual servers.

**GCP- Block and File Storage**

- Block Storage
  - Persistent Disk: Network Block Storage
    - Zonal: Data replicated in one zone
    - Regional: Data replicated in multiple zones (Recommended for data loads with high durability requirements)
  - Local SSDs: Local block storage (These are present on the same host as the virtual machine and local to that)
- File Storage
  - Filestore: High performance file storage
- Whenever you boot an instance, there is a boot disk attached to it by default, which is a balanced persistent disk.
- if you want to have more disks attached to the instance, you can do that as well by going to the disks section and adding a new disk or an existing disk.
- Filestore: An instance is a fully managed network-attached storage system you can use with your google compute engine and kubernetes engine instances. There are two types in the firestore named as basic and high scale and even you can choose between HDD and SSD. You also have option to choose where to store your data based on regions and zones. Once your firestore is ready you need to ssh into your VM instance and mount the firestore to your VM instance. You can also mount the firestore to your kubernetes engine instance.


**GCP- Block Storage**

- Two popular types of block storage can be attached to VM instances are: Local SSDs and Persistent Disks.
- *Local SSDs* are physically attached to the host of the VM instance. Typically, they are used for temporary storage, such as scratch space for a build process or a database cache and the lifecycle of the data is tied to the lifecycle of the VM instance.
- *Persistent Disks* are network attached block storage devices that can be attached to multiple VM instances. They are used for persistent data storage, such as a database or a file share. The lifecycle of the data is independent of the VM instance. They are more durable.
- *Local SSDs*:
  - Phycially attached to the host of the VM instance.
    - Provides very high (IOPS) and very low latency.
    - (BUT) Ephemeral Storage- Temporary data (Data persists only until the VM instance is running)
      - Enable live migration for data to survive maintainance events.
    - Data is automatically encrypted, however you cannot configure encryption keys.
    - Lifecycle tied to the VM instance.
    - Only some machine types support local SSDs.
    - Supports SCSI and NVMe interfaces.
  - Remember: Choose NVMe-enabled and multi-queue SCSI images for best performance.
  - Larger local SSDs (more storage), More vCPUs (attached to VM)=> Even better performance.
  - Advantages:
    - Very fast I/O(~10-100x compared to persistent disks)
      - Higher throughput and lower latency.
    - Ideal for use cases needing high IOPs while storing temporary data.
      - Examples: Caches, Temporary Data, Scratch files, etc.
  - Disadvantages:
    - Ephemeral storage.
      - Lower durability, lower availability, lower flexibility compared to Persistent Disks.
- *Persistent Disks*
  - Network block storage attached to your VM instance.
  - Provsioned Capacity
  - Very Flexible:
    - Increase its size when you need it- When attached to a VM instance, you can resize the disk.
    - Perform scales with the size of the disk, the more you provision the more performance you will get.
  - Independent lifecycle from the VM instance.
    - Attach/Detach from one VM instance to another.
  - Options: Regional and Zonal
    - Zonal Persistent disk are replicated in single zone.
    - Regional Persistent disks are replicated in 2 zones among the same region.
    - Typically regional persistent disks are 2x the cost of zonal persistent disks.
  - Usecase: Run your custom database on a persistent disk.

**Persistent Disks vs Local SSDs**

- Feature: Attachment to VM instance
  - Persistent Disks: As a network drive
  - Local SSDs: Physically attached to the host of the VM instance.
- Feature: Lifecycle
  - Persistent Disks: Separate from the VM instance.
  - Local SSDs: Tied to the VM instance. You can't detach the local SSD from the VM instance.
- Feature: I/O Speed
  - Persistent Disks: Lower (network latency)
  - Local SSDs: 10-100x of persistent disks.
- Feature: Snapshots
  - Persistent Disks: Supported
  - Local SSDs: Not Supported
- Feature: Use Case
  - Persistent Disks: Permanent storage
  - Local SSDs: Ephemeral Storage

**Exploring Persistent Disk Types**

- Feature: Underlying Storage
  - Standard: Hard disk drive
  - Balanced: Solid State Drive
  - SSD: Solid State Drive
- Feature: Reffered to as
  - Standard: pd-standard
  - Balanced: pd-balanced
  - SSD: pd-ssd
- Feature: Performance- Sequential IOPS (Big Data/Batch)
  - Standard: Good
  - Balanced: Good
  - SSD: Very Good
- Feature: Performance- Random IOPS (Transactional Apps)
  - Standard: Bad
  - Balanced: Good
  - SSD: Very Good
- Feature: Cost
  - Standard: Cheapest
  - Balanced: In Between
  - SSD: Expensive
- Feature: Use Case
  - Standard: Big Data/Batch
  - Balanced: Balance between cost and performance
  - SSD: High performance

**Persistent Disk- Snapshots**

- Snapshots are the backup of your persistent disks.
- Take point-in-time snapshots of your persistent disks.
- You can also schedule snapshots (configure a schedule).
  - You can also auto-delete snapshots after a certain period of time.
- Snapshots can be Regional or Multi-Regional.
- You can share snapshots with other projects.
- You can create new disks and instances from snapshots.If your snapshot contains boot disk too, you can even launch an instance from that.
- Snapshots are incremental:
  - Deleting a snapshot only deletes the data which is not needed by other snapshots.
  - You don't lose data by deleting older snapshots.
  - (Remember) do not hesitate to delete unnecessary snapshots.
- Keep similar data together on a persistent disk:
  - Seperate your Operating System, volatile data, and permanent data.
  - Attach multiple disks if needed.
  - This helps to better organize your snapshots and images.
- Snapshot Recommendations:
  - Avoid taking snapshots more than once an hour.
  - Disk Volume is available for use but snapshots reduce performance.
    - (Recommended) Schedule snapshots during off-peak hours.
  - Creating snapshots from disk is faster than creating snapshots from images.
    - But creating disks from images is faster than creating disks from snapshots.
    - (Recommended) If you repeatedly creating disks from snapshots, create an image from the snapshot and use that image to create disks.

**We can create a snapshot from a disk or can create a disk from a snapshot. Either you can schedule a snapshot.**

- When creating snapshots:
  - You can choose the schedule frequency as hourly, daily or weekly
  - You can specify the time for taking snapshot, Choose the time when there will be least load on your disk.
  - You can also auto-delete snapshots after a certain period of days.
  - You can also make a deletion rule for your snapshots, where you can keep the snapshots or delete snapshots on the basis of age of snapshots.
  - You can also have labels for your snapshots.

**Mounting a data persistent disk on a VM instance**

- Steps to attach a newly created Persistent disk with an already running VM:
  - A:Attach disk to a running or stopped instance.
    - gcloud compute instances attach-disk INSTANCE_NAME --disk DISK_NAME --zone ZONE
  - B: Format the disk.
    - List disks attached to your instance.
      - sudo lsblk
    - Format to file format of your choice(example: ext4 file system)
      - sudo mkfs.ext4 -m 0 -E lazy_itable_init=0,lazy_journal_init=0,discard /dev/sdb
  - C: Mount the disk.
    - Create a mount point
      - sudo mkdir -p /mnt/disks/data
    - Mount the disk
      - sudo mount -o discard,defaults /dev/sdb /mnt/disks/data
    - Set the mount point to be mounted automatically at boot time.
      - Create the directory to mount to
        - sudo mkdir -p /mnt/disks/MY_DIR
      - Mount the disk
        - sudo mount -o discard,defaults /dev/sdb /mnt/disks/MY_DIR
      - Provide permissions to the mount point
        - sudo chmod a+w /mnt/disks/MY_DIR
- Resizing Data persistent disks:
  - Resize the disk
    - gcloud compute disks resize DISK_NAME --size SIZE --zone ZONE
  - Take a snapshot of the disk (for the backup, if anything goes wrong)
  - Resize the file system and partitions:
    - ext4: sudo resize2fs /dev/sdb
    - xfs: sudo xfs_growfs /dev/sdb

**Machine Images**

- (Remember) Machine Images is different from image.
- Multiple disks can be attached with a VM instance:
  - One boot disk (Your os runs from boot disk)
  - Multiple data disks
- An image is created from the boot persistent disk.
- However, a machine image is created from a VM instance.
  - Machine images contains everything you need to create a VM instance:
    - Configuration
    - Metadata
    - Permissions
    - Data from one or more disks
- **It is recommended for disk backups, instance cloning and replication.**
  - Choose the VM you wanted to get a machine image for
  - Choose machine image from the menu button
  - Name your machine image
  - Choose the source VM instance from the drop down menu
  - Choose the storage location as regional or multi-regional
  - Choose the Encryption type as Google managed or Customer managed or customer supplied encryption key. (CMEK or CSEK)
  - Click on create and later you can can choose this machine image to create a VM instance.

**Comaprison of Machine Images and Snapshots**

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Scenarios</th>
<th>Machine image</th>
<th>Persistent disk snapshot</th>
<th>Custom image</th>
<th>Instance template</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Single disk backup</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No(Because it contains only the configuration.)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Multiple disk backup</td>
<td>Yes(Because it can take copy of everything)</td>
<td>No(Because it will be only for a single disk.)</td>
<td>No(Because it will be only contain a boot disk backup.)</td>
<td>No(As this is not the right usecase)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Differential backup</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No(As it takes all the data available on the disk.)</td>
<td>No</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Instance cloning</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>Yes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Base image for replication</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Storage Scenarios- Persistent Disk**

- Scenario: You want to improve performance of Persistent Disks(PD).
  - Solution: Increase the size of persistent disk or add more persistent disks. Also, Increase vCPUs in your virtual machine.
- Scenario: You want to increase durability of Persistent Disks(PD).
  - Solution: Go for regional persistent disks.(2x cost but replicated in 3 zones)
- Scenario: You want to take hourly backup of persistent disks(PD) for disaster recovery.
  - Solution: Schedule hourly snapshots.
- Scenario: You want to delete old snapshots created by scheduled snapshots.
  - Solution: Configure auto-delete rules as part of your snapshot scheduling!

**Filestore**

- Shared cloud files storage.
  - Supports NFSv3 protocol.
  - Provisioned Capacity: It means how large or big your filestore you want to configure.
- Suitable for high peformance workloads:
  - Upto 320TB with throughput upto 16 GB/s and 480K IOPS.
- Supports HDD (general purpose workload) and SSD (high performance workload and performance-critical workloads).
- Use cases: File share, media workflows and content management.
- Global Resources:
  - Images
  - Snapshots
  - Instance Templates (unless you use Zonal resources in your templates).
- Regional Resources:
  - Regional managed instance groups
  - Regional persistent disks.
- Zonal
  - Zonal managed instance groups
  - Instances
  - Zonal persistent disks
    - You can only attach a disk only to instances in the same zone as the disk.

**Stoarge Scenarios- Block and File Storage**

- Scenario: You want very high IOPS but your data can be lost without a problem.
  - Solution: Local SSDs
- Scenario: You want to create a high performance file sharing system in GCP which can be attached with multiple VM instances.
  - Solution: Filestore
- Scenario: You want to backup your VM configuration along with all its attached persistent disks.
  - Solution: Machine Images
- Scenario: You want to make it easy launch VMs with hardened os and customized software.
  - Solution: Custom Images

**Notes**

- Increase size while persistent disk is connected to a VM instance, which can help you to increase the performance of a persistent disk.
- For attaching a newly created data persistent disk to an already running VM instance, you need to attach persistent disk to VM instance and then format and mount the disk.
- To increase the size of the data persistent disk attached to a running VM instance, you need to resize the disk. Resize file system using resize2fs or xfs_growfs command based on the file system. VM restart is not needed in this case.
- Local SSDs are the block storage options which is recommended for application needing very fast disk IOPS with ephemeral data.