**Google Cloud IAM**

- IAM is a global service.
- You have a whole umbrella of project, in which there are multiple resources. These resources are needed to be managed and accessed by certain number of resources. These contributors or identities that need to access these resources can be humans(like a user assigned to do certain work on some part of resources) or machines(like a service account that needs to access some resources to perform some task or an application which needs to talk to the database).
- In GCP, Identity and access management (Cloud IAM) provides this service of Identifying and configuring access and actions to those resources.
- Cloud Identity and Access Management looks for Authentication(Is it the right user?) and Authorization(Do they have the access rights to perform the action?).
- Identities can be
  - A GCP User (Google Account or Externally Aythenticated User)
  - A Group of GCP Users
  - An application running in GCP
  - An application running in your datacenter
- Provides very fine grained access or granular control.
  - Limit a single user:
    - To perform a single action
    - On a specific cloud resource
    - From a specific IP address
    - During a specific time period
- In Cloud IAM
  - ROLES: A set of permissions (to perform specific actions on a specific resource)
    - Roles do not know about members. They are just a set of permissions.
  - POLICY: You assign (or bind) to role to a member which you can assign the permissions.
  - Here you can choose a role with the right permissions and assign it to the right member. Example: Storage Object Admin
  - Now you can create the Policy binding member (your friend) with the needed roles and permissions.

**IAM Roles**

- Roles are permissions:
  - Perform some set of actions on some set of resources.
- Three Types:
  - Basic Roles (or primitive roles): Owner/Editor/Viewer
    - Viewer(roles/viewer): Read-only actions
    - Editor(roles/editor): Viewer + Edit actions
    - Owner(roles/owner): Editor + Manage roles and permissions + Billing
    - These roles are not recommended to be used in production.
  - Predefined Roles: Fine grained roles pre-defined and are managed by Google.
    - Different roles for different purposes.
    - Examples: Storage Admin, Storage Object Admin, Storage Object Viewer, Storage Object Creator.
  - Custom Roles: You can create your own roles. When predefined roles are not sufficient, you can create your own custom roles.
- Go to Roles by searching into the search bar.
- You can filter and search for roles.
- Creating a custom role:
  - Give your role a title.
  - Give an ID, choose the right ID as you need to bind it to a member.
  - You can choose between the role launch stage which can be Alpha/Beta/General Availability/Disabled.
  - Now you can add permissions to your role, like a specific permission to create a specific resource.
  - Now click create to make your custom role.

  - Important cloud storage roles:
    - Storage Admin (roles/storage.admin):
      - storage.buckets.*
      - storage.objects.*
    - Storage Object Admin (roles/storage.objectAdmin):
      - storage.objects.*
    - Storage Object Creator (roles/storage.objectCreator):
      - storage.object.create
    - Storage Object Viewer (roles/storage.objectViewer):
      - storage.objects.get
      - storage.objects.list
  - All four roles have these permissions:
    - resourcemanager.projects.get
    - resourcemanager.projects.list

**IAM-Most Important Concepts**

- Member: Who is the user or service account that is being assigned a role.
- Role: What permissions are being assigned to the member.
- Policy: Assign permissions to members.
  - Map roles(what?), Members(who?) and Conditions (Which Resources, where?).
  - Permissions are not directly assigned to member.
    - Permissions are represented by roles.
    - Member gets permissions through roles.
  - A role can have multiple permissions.
  - You can assign multiple roles to a member.

- IAM POLICY: Roles are assigned to users through IAM policy documents.
- Represented by a policy object
  - Policy object has a list of bindings.
  - A binding, binds a role to the list of members.
- A member type is represted by its prefix.
  - Example: user, serviceaccount, group or domain.

IAM Policy- Example:

{

    "bindings": [
        
        {
            
            "role": "roles/storage.objectAdmin",
            
            "members": [
                
                "user:abhinav@cloud-devops-enthusiast",
                
                "serviceAccount:myAppName@appspot.gserviceaccount.com",
                
                "group:administrators@cloud-devops-enthusiast.com",
                
                "domain:google.com"
        
        },
        
        {
            
            "role": "roles/storage.objectViewer",
            
            "members": [
            
                "user:abhinav@cloud-devops-enthusiast",
            
            ]
            
            condition": {
            
                    "title": "Limited time access",
            
                    "description": "Only upto Feb 2022",
            
                    "expression": "request.time < timestamp('2022-02-01T00:00:00.00Z')",
            
                }
            
            ]
        
        }
    
    ]

}

*Commands:*

- gcloud compute project-info describe
- gcloud auth list
- gcloud projects get-iam-policy glowing-furnance-304608
- gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding glowing-furnance-304608 --member=user:in28min@gmail.com --role=roles/storage.objectAdmin
- gcloud projects remove-iam-policy-binding glowing-furnance-304608 --member=user:in28min@gmail.com --role=roles/storage.objectAdmin
- gcloud iam roles describe roles/storage.objectAdmin
- gcloud iam roles copy --source=roles/storage.objectAdmin --destination=my.custom.role --dest-project=glowing-furnance-304608

- Member is also called as PRINCIPAL or identity.
- You can assign roles by adding them in iam and assigning the role and if needed you can even configure the conditions.
- You can use the Policy Troubleshooter role to find issue with anybodys access. If someone is unable to access anything. You can do this by choosing the project and choosing the permission for which you want to check. You can add more and check access for those accounts.


**SERVICE ACCOUNTS**

- A service account represents a google cloud service identify, such as code running on Compute Engine VM's, App Engine, or Cloud Functions running outside Google.
- Organizational policies can be used secure service accounts and blocks risky service account features, such as automatic IAM grants, key creation/upload or the creation of service accounts entirely.
- Scenario: An application on a VM needs access to a cloud resource.
  - You don't want to use personal credentials to allow access.
- (Recommended) Use service accounts
  - Identified by an email address (ex: id-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com)
  - Does not have a password
    - Has a private/public RSA key-pairs
    - You can't login via browsers or cookies
- Service Account types:
  - Default service account: Automatically created when some services are used.
    - (not recommended) Has editor role by default.
  - User Managed- User Created
    - (recommended) Provides fine grained access control. 
- Creating a Service Account:
  - Enter the service account name accompanied by the sercice account ID which you can choose and check for your project.
  - Click create and go on the next screen.
  - Now you need to grant this service account access to the projects.
  - These accesses can be the roles and conditions for the same. These conditions can be the time, resource, schedule, expriring access, day of week or hour of day. Some roles out of it can be the Compute admin or the Storage Object Admin.
  - Now click create and you are done.
- Google managed Service accounts: Created and managed by google itself.
  - Used by GCP to perform operations on your behalf.
  - In general, we do not need to worry about them.
- You can set these service accounts from the Identity and API access. Applications running on the VM use the service account to call Google Cloud APIs. Use permissions on the console menu to create a service account or use the default service account.

**Service Account Use Cases**

- *Use Case 1: VM Instance Accessing Cloud Storage*
  1. Create a service account role with the right kind of permissions of your need.
  2. Assign Service account role to the VM instance.
  3. This uses the Google Cloud Managed keys:
    - Key generation and use are automatically handled by IAM when we assign a Service Account to a VM instance.
    - The keys are automatically rotated.
    - No need to store credentials in config files.
  4. Do not delete the service accounts used by the running VM instances.
- *Use Case 2: On-Premises to Cloud Storage* (Long Lived)
  1. Problem with an on premises machine is you cannot assign a service account directly to an On Premises Application.
  2. Create a Service Account with the right kind of permissions.
  3. Create a Service Account User managed key.
    - gcloud iam service-accounts keys create
    - Now you can download the service account key file.
      - Keep it secure (It can be used to impersonate the service account)
      - If you lose it, you can create a new one.
  4. Use Google Cloud Client Libraries to access the cloud resources.
    - These libraries make use of Application Default Credentials(ADC).
      - ADC uses the service account key file if env var GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS is set.
  - Make the service account key accessible to your application.
    - Set an environmental variable GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS to the path of the service account key file.
    - For this you need to go to the IAM>> Service Accounts>> Edit Account>> Add Key or Create Key.
    - There are two types of private keys:
      - JSON: Used by applications running on the VM.
      - P12: Used by applications running on the on-premises machine. For backward compatibility with code using the P12 format.
- *Use Case 3: On-Premises to Google Cloud APIs* (Short Lived)
  1. Make calls from outside of GCP to Google Cloud APIs with short lived permissions.
    - Few hours or shorter
    - Less Risk compared to sharing service account keys.
  2. Credential Types:
    - OAuth 2.0 Access Tokens
    - OpenID Connect ID Tokens
    - Self-signed JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)
  - Example: 
    - When a member needs elevated permissions, he can assume the service account role. (Create OAuth 2.0 access token for the service token).
    - OpenID connect ID tokens is recommended for service to service authetication for short period of time.
      - A service in GCP needs to authenticate itself to a service in other cloud provider.

**Service Account Use Case Scenarios**

- *Scenario 1: Application on a VM wants to talk to a Cloud Storage Bucket*
  - Solution: Configure the VM to use a Service Account with the right permissions.
- *Scenario 2: Application on a VM wants to put a message on a Pub/Sub Topic*
  - Solution: Configure the VM to use a Service Account with the right permissions.
- *Scenario 3: Is Service Account an identity or a Resource?*
  - Solution: It is both. You can attach roles with service account (identity). You can let other members access a SA by granting them a role on the Service Account (resource).
- *Scenario 4: VM instance with default service account in Project A needs to access Cloud Storage Bucket in Project B*
  - Solution: In project B, add the service account from Project A and assign storage object viewer persmission on the bucket.

**Cloud Storage: ACL(Access Control Lists)**

- *ACL*: Define who has access to your buckets and objects, as well as what level of access they have.
- It is different from IAM.
  - IAM permissions apply to all objects within a bucket.
  - ACLs can be used to customized specific accesses to different objects.
- Users gets access if he is allowed by either ACL or IAM.
- (REMEMBER) Use IAM for common permissions to all objects in a bucket.
- (REMEMBER) Use ACLs if you need to customize access to individual objects.

- ACCESS CONTROL - OVERVIEW
- Two types of access control:
  - *Uniform*(Recommended): Uniform bucket level access using IAM.
  - *Fine-grained*: Use IAM and ACLs to control access:
    - Both bucket level and individual object level permissions.
- Use uniform access when all users have same level of access across all objects in a bucket.
- The Fine grained access with ACLs can be used when you need to customize the access at an object level.
- Uniform access control removes object ACLs from this bucket. This will revoke object access for users who rely solely on ACLs for access unless you add their permissions to the bucket's IAM policy.
- Fine grained access with ACLs can be used when you need to customize the access at an object level.
  - Give a user specific access to edit specific objects in a bucket.

**CLOUD STORAGE: SIGNED URLS**

- You want to allow a user limited time access to your objects.
  - Users do not need Google account.
- Use Signed URL functionality.
  - A URL that gives permissions for limited time duration to perform specific actions on a specific object.
- To create a signed URL:
  1. Create a key (YOUR_KEY) for the service account/user with the desired permissions.
  2. Now create a Signed URL with the key;
    - gsutil signurl -d 10m YOUR_KEY gs://BUCKET_NAME/OBJECT_PATH

**Cloud Storage: Exposing a Public Website**

1. Create a bucket with the same name as website name (Name of the bucket should match DNS name of the Website).
  - Verify that the domain is owned by you.
2. Copy the files to the bucket.
  - Add index and error html files for better use experience.
3. Add member allUsers and grant *Storage Object Viewer* permission, which will allow read access to GCS objects.
  - Select allow public access

**Scenarios: Cloud IAM**

- Scenario: An application on a GCE VM needs access to cloud storage.
  - Solution: Assign a Service Account use with the right permissions to the VM. (Google Cloud Managed Keys)
- Scenario: An application on premises needs access to cloud storage.
  - Solution: Create a key and make it available to your on-premises. Use Service Account User Managed Keys.
- Scenario: Allow a user limited time access to your projects.
  - Solution: Signed URL functionality.
- Scenario: Customize access to a subset of objects in a bucket.
  - Solution: Use ACLs. (Access Control Lists)
- Scenario: Permission is allowed by IAM but not by ACL. Will user be able to access the object?
  - Solution: Yes. User will be able to access the object.

**NOTES**

- Reader, is not a basic role.
- You should not always use the Basic Roles to provide access to your users.
- An on-premise application needs access to files in a Cloud Storage Bucket, Use a Service Account with a User Managed Key.
- If permissions are granted by IAM but not by ACL, the user will be able to access the object.