**GOOGLE CLOUD RELATIONAL DATABASE**

**Cloud SQL**

- Cloud SQL is a fully managed relational database service
  - Configure your needs and do not worry about managing the database. Like backups, high availability, patching, etc.
  - This supports SQL Server, MySQL, and PostgreSQL
  - Regional service providing high availability (99.95%)
  - You can use either HDDs or SSDs (for best performance: Use SSDs)
  - We can use 416GB of RAM per instance and 30 TB of storage per instance
- Use Cloud SQL for simple relational use cases
  - To migrate local MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQL Server databases.
  - To reduce your maintenance cost for a simple relational database.
  - (Remember) Use Cloud spanner (Expensive $$$$) instead of cloud SQL if:
    - You have huge volumes of relational data (TBs) OR
    - You need infinite scaling for a growing application (to TBs) OR
    - You need a global (Distributed across multiple regions) database OR
    - You need high availability (99.999%)

**Cloud SQL Commands**

- gcloud sql connect my-first-cloud-sql-instance --user=root --quiet
  - This will connect to the cloud SQL instance
- gcloud config set project [PROJECT_ID]
  - This will set the project ID
- gcloud sql connect my-first-cloud-sql-instance --user=root --quiet
  - This will connect to the cloud SQL instance
- use todos;
  - This will use the todos database
- create table user (id integer, username varchar(30));
  - This will create a table called user with id and username
- describe user;
  - This will describe the user table
- insert into user values (1, 'Ranga');
  - This will insert a record into the user table
- select * from user;
  - This will select all the records from the user table

**PLaying with Cloud SQL**

- You can either create a cloud SQL inside a single zone or multiple zones(Highly Available) instance but cannot create a global instance.
- Go to database and create a new database
- You can connect to this instance using the gcloud command **gcloud sql connect my-first-cloud-sql-instance --user=root --quiet**
- You can check for the cloud SQL admin API to be enabled in the project
- You can create read replicas from any primary instance to replicate your data.
  - You can create read replicas in the same region or in a different region.
- By going to the operations tab you can see the log of operations performed on the cloud SQL instance.
- You can configure the Automate Backups and point-in-time recovery for your cloud SQL instance.
  - This point-in-time recovery will allow you to restore your database to a specific point in time. You can also choose from how old transactions you want to restore.
- This is for usecase where you want to restore your database to a specific point in time.

- Features of Cloud SQL:
  - Automatic Encryption (Tables/backups), maintenance and updates.
  - High availability (99.95%) and failover
    - Create a standby database with automatic failover
    - Pre requisite: Automated backups and Binary Logging
  - Read replicas for read workloads:
    - Options: Cross Zone, Cross Region and External (Non-cloud SQL DB) (This external db can also be an on-prem database)
    - Pre requisite: Automated backups and Binary Logging
  - Automatic storage increase without causing a downtime (This is available for newer verisions)
  - Point-in time recovery: Enable binary logging
  - Backups (Automated and On-demand backups)
  - Supports migratiomn from other sources.
    - Use database migration service (DMS) to migrate from on-prem to cloud SQL
  - You can export data from UI (console) or gcloud with formats
    - SQL (Recommended if your import data into other databases) and csv

**Cloud SQL- High Availability**

- Create a High Availability (HA) Configuration
  - Choose Primary and Secondary Zones within a region
  - You will have two instances: Primary and Secondary instances.
- Changes from primary are replicated Syncronously to secondary
- In case of Zonal failure, automatic failover to secondary instance
  - If primary zone becomes available, failover does not revert automatically
- (Remember) High Availability setup CANNOT be used as a Read Replica.

**Cloud SQL: Best Practices**

- Use cloud SQL Proxy:
  - Securely connect to Cloud SQL from your apps (GAE, Cloud Functions, Cloud Run, GKE, etc.)
- Understanding Scalability
  - Enable HA configuration for high availability
    - Primary instance and a standby instance created in the same region (Remember-Regional)
  - Read replicas help you offload read workloads (reporting, analytics, etc).
    - (Remember) Read replicas do not increase availability
  - Prefer number of small cloud SQL instances to having one large instance
- Understand Backup and Export options:
  - Backup are lightweight and provide point-in-time recovery
    - But backups are deleted when an instance is deleted
    - AND you can't back up a single database or table
    - You need to backup the entire instance
  - Exports take longer but they provide you with more flexibility
    - You can export a single database or table
    - (Remember) Exporting large databases can impact the performance of a Cloud SQL instance
      - Use serverless export (flag -offload) to reduce the impact
        - Cloud SQL creates a seperate, temporary instance to offload the export operation
    - Import/Export in multiple small batches instead of large batches

**GCP Cloud Spanner**

- Fully managed, mission critical, relational(SQL), globally distributed database with very high availability (99.999%).
  - Strong transactional consistency at global scale
  - Scales to PBs of data with automatic sharding
- Cloud spanner scales horizontally for reads and writes
  - Configure the number of nodes
  - (Remember) In comparison, Cloud SQL provides read replicas:
    - But you cannot horizontally scale the write operations with Cloud SQL!
- Regional and multi-regional configurations
- Expensive (compared to Cloud SQL)
  - Pay for nodes and storage
- Data Export: Use cloud console to export the data.
  - Other option is to use data flow to automate the export process.
  - No gcloud export option

**Cloud Spanner: Table Creation Script**

CREATE TABLE Users(

  UserId INT64 NOT NULL,

  UserName STRING(1024)

) PRIMARY KEY(UserId);

**Cloud Spanner: Demo**

- Enable the Cloud Spanner API.
- Create a new instance
  - Choose the instance ID
  - Choose the configuration, which can determine where your nodes and data are located.
  - Allocate the compute capacity
    - You can choose between nodes and the processing units
    - Here one node is equal to 1,000 processing units
- Now Create a Database
  - Choose the database name
  - Define your schema
  - Create the table using the DDL language(DDL)
  - As you can see, the table is created in the database
  - Now you can insert data into the table using the create index option
  - Now choose Insert data and it will take you to a page where you can insert data into the table
- There are options to Import/Export data from the database
  - Choose where you want to export your data.
  - Choose a database to export
  - Choose a region for your export job
- You can also create backups for your database
  - You can also restore your database from a backup

NOTES:

- Cloud Spanner is a service which can be used when you need a relational database for global transactional application.
- A High Availability configuration(HA) can be used to increase the availability of your Cloud SQL Instance.
- A Read replica can be used to create scalability of your cloud SQL instance by offloading read workloads.