**Google Cloud NoSQL Database**

**Cloud Datastore and Firestore**

- Datastore: Highly Scalable NoSQL Documemt Database.
  - Automatically scales and partitions data as it grows
  - Recommended for upto a few TBs of data
    - For bigger volumes, BigTable is recommended
  - It supports transactions, indexes and SQL like queries(GQL)
    - Does not support Joins or Aggregate (sum or count) operations
  - For use cases needing flexible schema with transactions
    - Examples: User profile and Product catalog
  - Structure: Kind>Entity (Use namespaces to group entities)
  - You can export data only from *gcloud* (Not from Cloud Console)
    - Export contains a metadata file and a folder with the data
- Firestore= Datastore++: Optimized for multi device access
  - Offline mode and data synchronization across multiple devices- Mobile, IOT, etc.
  - Provide client side libraries- Web, iOS, Android and more
  - Offers Datastore and Native modes

**Firestore: Demo**

- Cloud firestore is a next generation of cloud datastore. You can use cloud firestore in either native mode or datastore mode, each with distinct system behavior optimized for different types of projects. There are two modes for firestore;
  - Native Mode: Enable all of Cloud Firestore's features, with offline support and real-time synchronization.
  - Datastore Mode: Leverage cloud datastore's behavior on top of cloud firestore's powerful storage layer. If you want to create anythingin this mode you will have to create a new project.
- Create a database in firestore native mode.
- You can add data into firestore using the start collection button, where "A collection is a a set of one or more documents that contains the data. Start a collection at this path by adding its first document."
  - You name the Collection ID.
    - You can add a document ID or let firestore generate one for you.
      - Now add the field name with the field type and the field value.
- You can also use the Indexes option to create indexes for your database.
  - You can create a composite index or a single field index. "Composite Indexes support queries that match across multiple fields by indexing combinations of fields in action."
  - Cloud Firestore uses composite indexes for compound queries not already supported by single field indexes.
  - You can put the field paths and index options whether you want it in ascending or descending order.
  - Here you have option for giving the scope of query as Collection(For queries in a specific collecrion) or Collection Group(For queries across all collections with the same collection-ID).
  - Cloud Firestore automatically indexes every field you add, enabling most simple queries by default. You can add exemptions to customize how a specific field is indexed.


**Cloud Datastore: Best Practices**

- Cloud datastore is a document store with flexible schema.
  - Recommended for storing things like user profiles, product catalog, etc.
  - Another use case: Index for objects are stored in cloud storage.
    - You want to allow users to upload their profile pictures.
      - Store objects(pictures) in cloud storage.
      - Enable quick search by storing the metadata (like ids and cloud storage bucket, object details) in cloud datastore.
- Design your keys and indexs very carefully
  - Avoid monotonically increasing value as keys
    - Not recommended-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 or "Customer1, Customer2, Customer3, Customer4, Customer5, Customer6, Customer7, Customer8, Customer9, Customer10"or timestamp
    - Recommended- Use allocatedIds() for well-distributed numeric IDs.
  - Create indexes only if they would be used in queries
    - For ad hoc queries on large datasets without pre-defined indexes, bigquery is recommended.
- Prefer batch operations(to single read, write or delete operations)
  - Batch operations are more efficient as multiple operations are performed with same overhead as one operation.


**Cloud BigTable**

- Petabyte scale, wide column NoSQL database (HBase API compatible)
  - Designed for huge volumes of analytical and operational data
    - IOT streams, Analytics, Time series data, etc.
  - Handle millions of reads/write TPS at very low latency
  - Single row transactions (multi-row transactions are not supported), due to which this becomes a non recommended option for use cases needing transactions.
- Not Serverless: You need to create a server instance (Use SSD's or HDD)
  - Scale horizontally with multiple nodes (No downtime for cluster resizing)
- Cannot export data using cloud console or gcloud
  - Either use a java application (java -jar JAR export\import) OR
  - Use the HBase API to export/import data
- Use cbt command line tool to work with BigTable (not gcloud)
  - Example: cbt createtable mytable (Command for creating a table)
- Cloud BigTable- Wide Column Database
  - At the most basic level, each table is a sorted key/value map.
  - Each value in a row is indexed using a key -row key
  - Related columns are grouped into column families
    - Each column family is identified by using column-family:column-qualifier (or name)
  - This structure supports high read and write throughput at low latency
    - Advantages: Scalable to petabytes of data with milisecond response upto millions of transactions per second
  - Use Case: IOT Streams, graph data and real time analytics (time-series data, financial data-transaction histories, stock prices, etc.)
  - Cloud Dataflow: USed to export data from BigTable to Cloud Storage

**Designing BigTable Tables**

- You need to think these things before using BigTable
  - What data do you want to store onto it? (Format,Colums, etc.)
  - What would your frequently used queries look like (ranked by usage)?
- Design your table: Cloud BigTable is a key/value store
  - Each table has only one index, the row key
  - Design your row key based on your frequently used queries
    - You can have multiple row key segments - separated by a delimiter (ex:ranga#123456#abcd)
    - Avoid sequential row keys (ex: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10)(timestamps or sequential numbers)
      - Include timestamp as part of your row key IF you plan to retrive data based on the timestamp
      - If you frequently access data, use reversed timestamp (Example: Long.MAX_VALUE - timestamp)
        - Records will be ordered from most recent to least recent
  - After you design your table:
    - Test (heavy load for several minutes + one hour simulation) with at least 30 GB of test data.
    - You can use key visualizer tool to analyze the usage patterns for Cloud Bigtable

**Cloud BigTable: Best Practices**

- Recommended for Streaming IOT and time series data like logs, metrics, etc.
- Automatically shards data into multiple tablets across nodes in cluster:
  - Goal 1: Have same amount of data on each node
  - Goal 2: Distribute reads and writes equally across all nodes
  - Remember: Pre-Test with heavy load for a few minutes before you run your tests.
    - Gives bigtable a chance to balance data across your nodes
  - Cloud Bigtable supports both SSD and HDD storage
    - SSD is recommended for high performance (For most usecases)
    - HDD is recommended for low cost (For large non latency sensitive datasets of size >10TB with very very few reads/writes)

**Cloud BigTable: Best Practices- Replication**

- You can create a Cloud Bigtable instance with more than one cluster to enable replication (Cross Region or Cross Zone)
  - Independent copy of data is stored in each cluster (In the zone of the cluster)
  - Bigtable automatically replicates changes
  - Replication improves durability and availability of your data
    - Stores seperate copies in multiple zones or regions
    - Can automatically failover between clusters if needed
  - Replications helps you to put your data closer to your customers
    - Configure an application profile, or app profile with routing policy of multi-cluster routing
      - Automatically route to nearest clusters in an instance

NOTES;

- Cloud Datastore is a document data store that can be used to store things like user profiles.
- Cloud Datastore is a NO-SQL database that allows you to create multiple indexes on a table.
- Cloud BigTable is a No-SQL database that allows you to store huge volumes of analytical and operational data.
- Add a cluster to the cloud bigtable instance in a new region or new zone which can be used to increase the availability of Cloud BigTable and decrease the latency to the end users.