**Compute Engine**

Virtual Machines- Virtual servers in GCP

Features-

* Create and manage the lifecycle of virtual machine (VM) instances.
* Load balancing and auto scaling for multiple VM instances.
* Attach storage & network storage to your VM instances.
* Manage network connectivity and configuration for your VM instances.

Creating VM Instance-
- Create a VM
    New VM instance: Create a new VM instance from Scratch
    New VM instance from template: Create a single VM instance from an existing template.
    New VM instance from machine image: Create a single VM intance from an existing machine image.
    Marketplace: Deploy a ready-to-go solution onto a VM instance.

- Name your VM

- Choose labels with key-value pairs, example: environment=dev, business=sales

- Choose the region and zone

- Choose the machine type
    * General-purpose (E2,N2,N2D,N1): This provides Best price-performance ratio. Machine types for commpn workloads, optimized for cost and flexibility. This is mostly suitable for Web and application servers, Small-medium databases, Dev environments, etc.

    * Memory-optimized (M2, M1): This provides ultra high memory workloads. Large-Memory machine types for memory-intensive workloads, optimized for performance. This is mostly suitable for Large in-memory databases and In-memory analytics.

    * Compute-optimized (C2): High performance machine types for compute-intensive workloads, optimized for performance. For example it can be something like gaming servers which require high CPU performance.

For Example: e2-standard-2
Where e2 is the machine family, standard is the machine series, 2 is the number of vCPUs.
One thing to mention over here is that Memory, Disk and Networking Capabilities increase along with the number of vCPUs, which means there is a scope for higher performance as compared to other machine types.

- Choose the boot disk like
    Public Images: This image is provided and maintained by Google or Open source communities or Third party vendors. Example: Debian, CentsOS, Ubuntu, Windows Server, etc.
    Custom Images: Created by you for your projects or your organzation.
    Snapshots
    Existing Disks

- Choose the Firewall Configurations: Add tags and firewall rules to allow specific network traffic from the internet.
    Allow HTTP traffic
    Allow HTTPS traffic

- Options available for VM's
    * Stop: To stop the VM instance
    * Suspend: It is like a pause to your VM
    * Reset: To restart the VM instance
    * Delete: To delete the VM instance

Practice: Compute Engine Hands-on : Setting up a HTTP Server
    #!/bin/bash
    
    sudo su // To get root access
    
    apt update // To update the packages
    
    apt install apache2 -y // To install apache2
    
    use the external IP of the VM to access the webserver

- Understanding Internal and External IP addresses v2
    * Internal IP: This is the IP address that is used to communicate with other VMs in the same project or to a corporate network. This is not accessible from the internet.
    * External IP: This is the IP address that is used to communicate with the internet. This is accessible from the internet.
    * You cannot have two resources with the same external IP address in the same project.
        * However, two different corporate networks can have resources with same internal (private) IP addresses.
    * All VM instances are assigned at least one internal IP address.
    * Creation of external IP addresses can be enabled for VM Instances.
        * **Remember** When you stop an VM instance, external IP address is lost.
    
- Getting a static IP Addresses v2 (To get a constant external IP address)
    * Go to VPC Network -> External IP Addresses -> Reserve Static Address
    * Name the Static IP Address, Choose the network service tier, Here you can choose the type of static IP address you want to reserve, like whether you want to reserve a global static IP address or a regional static IP address.
        * **Caution:** Select the same region as that of your VM (Static addresses should be in the same region as the VM instance)
    * There is an automatically assigned IP address, which is the IP address that is assigned to your VM instance when it is created, but that IP address is a an ephemeral IP address, which means that it is not a static IP address. It is a dynamic IP address that is assigned to your VM instance when it is created and it is released when you stop your VM instance.
    * Check for the change button at the end of the static IP address, Click on it and choose the Attach to drop-down menu and choose the VM instance that you want to attach the static IP address to. **Note:** If you do not see a VM listed, ensure that VM and the static address are in the same region.
    * If you assign a static IP address to a VM instance, and then you stop the VM instance, the static IP address is not released. It is still reserved and it is still associated with the VM instance. So, when you start the VM instance again, the static IP address is automatically assigned to the VM Instance.
    * **Things to Remember**
        * Static IP addresses can be switched to another VM instance in the same project.
        * Static IP remains attached even if you stop the VM instance, but you need to manually detach it.
        * **Thing to remember** You're billed for an static IP address even if it is not attached to a VM instance or you are not using it as well. Make sure you explicitly delete the static IP address when you are done with it.
    * Simplify the VM HTTP server setup: There are multiple options to setup the HTTP server.
        * **Startup Script**: You can choose to specify a startup script that will run when your instance boots up or restarts. Startup scripts can be used to install software and updates and to ensure that services are running within the virtual machine.
            * Bootstrapping: Install OS patches or software when an VM instance is launched.
                * In VM, you can configure Startup Script to bootstrap the VM instance.
                * For creating one go to create an instance -> Management, security, disks, networking, sole tenancy -> Startup Script -> Add the Startup script -> Save -> Create
        * **Instance Template**: It's about to create a template for your VM instance. Which you can use to create multiple VM instances. In this you can define the machine type, image, labels, startup script and other properties. This can be used to create VM instances and managed instance groups, which provides a convinient way to create similar instances. These instance templates cannot be updated, so if you want to make changes in the template, copy an existing template and make the changes in the copy. (One thing to mention as, Image family can be specified in the template, example-debian-9, Latest non-deprecated version of the image family will be used.) **Instance Template is in the same process like the process we create an instance and there is no cost associated with creating an instance template.**
        * **Custom Image**: Installing OS patches and software at launch of VM instances increases boot up time. Here it is about creating a custom image with OS patches and software installed. This can be created from an instance, a persistent disk, a snapshot, or a file in cloud storage. These custom images can be shared across projects and can be used to create VM Instances. There is a feature provided by gcp, In which you can deprecate the old images and specify the replacement image like you can specify the new image as a replacement for the old image. You can create a VM with all your corporate standards and from that you create your image where this process is called as Hardening an Image. These custom images are prefered using custom image to Startup Script. Whenever you create an instance there is storage -> Disks is automatically connected with that which stores the OS and the data for that particular VM. The disk name created like that has the same name as of the VM. For creating an Custom Image go to the Compute Engine -> Storage -> Images, in the below one fields you can specify the image's Location which can be either Multi-Regional or Regional. You neeed to specify that while creating Image, you need your VM to be Stopped. You can create an Image from a running Instance, but it's not recommended as Filesystem integrity can't be guaranteed while the instance is running, which may create a corrupted image. For creating a VM from the custom image, choose create Instance option from the menu or you can choose while creating instance like Boot Disk -> Custom Images. Even you can create an instance template from this custom image, which can be used in further time.
        
Bootstraping with Startup Script        
    #!/bin/bash

    apt update

    apt -y install apache2

    echo "Hello World from $(hostname) $(hostname -I)" > /var/www/html/index.html

**Compute Engine Scenarios**
* What are the pre-requisites to be able to create a VM Instance?
Solution: Project, Billing Account, Compute Engine APIs should be enabled (Service Name:compute.googleapis.com).
* You want dedicated hardware for your compliance, licensing and management requirements.
Solution: Use sole-tenant nodes.
Go to compute Engine -> Choose Sole-Tenant nodes -> Create node group -> Name the node group and choose the Region/Zone -> Choose the node template(If you don't have node template you need to create one) -> (Create a node template) Choose the name of the node, Choose the Node type(n1-node-96-624,n2-node-80-640), Choose if you want to have a Local SSD or GPU Accelerator, You can also Affinity labels) -> Configure Autoscaling(Here you need to specify the autoscaling mode and the number of nodes) -> at last you need to configure the maintainance settings (with the maintainance policy and Maintainance window) -> Create.
* I have 1000s of VM and I have to automate OS patch management, OS inventory management and OS configuration management (manage software installed on the VMs).
Solution: VM Manager (VM manager is a suite of tools that can be used to manage operating systems for large VM fleets, as when you enable VM manager with the default settings, the suite of tools is activated for all VMs in the current project. Alternatively you can manually enable VM manager for selected VM's only).
* You want to login to your VM instance to install software.
Solution: You can use SSH to connect to your VM instance. You can also use the cloud console to connect to your VM instance.
* You do not want to expose a VM to the internet.
Solution: Do not assign an external IP address to the VM instance.
* You want to allow HTTP traffic to your VM instance.
Solution: Configure a firewall rule to allow HTTP traffic to your VM instance.
        

While accessing the webserver, you will see the default apache2 page, where you will find the default debian root is /avr/www/html with index.html file. For Customization, you can create your own index.html file and place it in the /var/www/html folder or you can change the default index.html file.
    
You can also use simple commands to replace the stuff inside the index.html file like, echo "Hello World" > /var/www/html/index.html. This will replace the default index.html file with the new one, while printing "Hello World" on the webpage instead of the default one.

