**Google Cloud Operations**

**Cloud Monitoring**

- To operate cloud applications effectively, you must check for:
  - Application Health
  - Are the users experiencing any issues?
  - Does my databases have enough space?
  - Are my servers running in an optimal way?
- Cloud Monitoring: Tools to monitor your infrastructure
  - Measures key aspects of services (Metrics)
  - Create visualizations of metrics (Graphs and Dashboards)
  - Create alerts (when metrics are not healthy)
    - Define alerting policies: Specify the conditions that trigger an alert as through whcih channels you want to be notified and the documents which can specify the conditions that trigger an alert as well as through which channels you want to be notified and the documents which can be used to troubleshoot the issue.

**Cloud Monitoring: Workspace**

- You can use Cloud Monitoring to monitor one or more GCP projects and one or more AWS accounts.
- How do you group all the information from multiple GCP projects or AWS accounts?
- Create a Workspace
  - Workspace are needed to organize monitoring information
    - A workspace allows you to see monitoring information from multiple projects.
    - Step 1: Create workspace in a specific project (Host project)
    - Step 2: Add other projects to the workspace

**Cloud Monitoring: Virtual Machine Monitoring**

- Default monitoring metrics include:
  - CPU utilization
  - Disk utilization
  - Network utilization
  - Memory utilization
  - Disk read/write operations
  - Network read/write operations
- For more metrics its better to install Cloud Monitoring agent over the VM.
  - collectd-based daemon
  - Gather metrics from the VM and send them to Cloud Monitoring