**Google Cloud IAM and Project Organization**

**Google Cloud Resources- Projects, Folders, and Organizations**

- Well Defined hierarchy:
  - *Organization > Folder > Project > Resources*
- Resources are created in a projects.
- A folder can multiple projects.
- Organization can contain multiple folders.

**Resource Hierarchy- Recommendations for Enterprises**

- Create separate projects for different environments (Dev, Test, Prod).
  - Complete isolation between environments like dev and prod.
- Create seperate folders for each department:
  - Isolate production applications for one department from another
  - You want to create a shared folder for shared resources
- One project per application per environment:
  - Let's consider two apps: "App1" and "App2"
  - Let's assume we need two environments: "Dev" and "Prod"
- In the ideal world you will create four projects:
  - A1-DEV, A1-PROD, A2-DEV, A2-PROD:
    - Isolates environments from each other
    - DEV changes will NOT break PROD
    - Grant all developers complete access (Create, Delete, Deploy) to DEV projects
    - Allow production access only to the operations teams

**Billing Accounts**

- Billing account is mandatory for creating resources in a project.
  - Billing account contains the payment details
  - Every project with active resources must be associated with a billing account
- Billing account can be associated with one or more projects
- You can have multiple billing accounts in an organization
- (Recommended) Create billing accounts representing your organization structure:
  - A startup can have just one billing account
  - A large enterprise can have a separate billing account for each department
- Two Types:
  - *Self Serve:* Billing directly to Credit Card or Bank Account
  - *Invoiced*: Generate invoices (Used by large enterprises)

**Manage Billing- Budget, Alerts and Exports**

- Setup a cloud billing budget to avoid surprises:
  - (Recommended) Configure alerts
  - Default alert threshold set at 50%, 90% and 100%
    - Send alerts to Pub Sub (Optional)
    - Billing admins and Billing Account users are alerted by e-mail
    - You can also link monitoring email notification channels to this budget
    - You can also connect a Pub/Sub topic to this budget
- Billing data can be exported (on a schedule) to:
  - Bigquery (If you want to query information and visualize it)
  - Cloud Storage (for history/archiving)

**IAM Best Practices**

- Principle of least privilege: Give least possible privilege needed for a role.
  - Basic roles are not recommended.
    - Prefer predefined roles when possible
  - Use service accounts with the minimum privileges
    - Use different service accounts for different purposes/apps
- Seperation of duties- Involve atleast 2 people in sensitive tasks:
  - Example: Have separate deployer and traffic migartor roles
    - AppEngine provides App Engine Deployer and App Engine Serrvice Admin roles
      - AppEngine Deployer can deploy new version but cannot shift traffic
      - AppEngine Service Admin can shift traffic but cannot deploy the new version
- Constant Monitoring: Review cloud audit logs to audit changes to IAM policies and access to Service Account Keys.
  - Archive cloud audit logs in cloud storage buckets for long term retention
- Use Groups whenever possible
  - Makes it easy to manage users and permissions


**User Identity Management in Google Cloud**

- Email is used to create free trial account => "Super Admin"
  - Access to everything in your GCP organization, folders and projects
  - Manage access to other users using their GMAIL accounts
  - IAM-POLICY-BINDING:
    - gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding [PROJECT_ID] --member user=[USER_EMAIL] --role role=[ROLE]
  - However this is not recommended for enterprise use
  - *Option 1:* Your enterprise is using Google Workspace
    - Use Google Workspace to manage users (groups etc)
    - Link Google Cloud Organization with Google Workspace
  - *Option 2:* Your Enterprise uses an Identity Provider of its own
    - Federate Google Cloud with your Identity Provider

**Corporate Directory Federation**

- Federate Cloud Identity or Google Workspace with your external identity provider (Idp) such as Active Directory or Azure Active Directory.
- Cloud Identity, is a unified identity, access, app and endpoint management (IAM/EMM) platform that helps IT and security teams maximize end user efficiency and security.
- Cloud identity is not enabled by default, you need to enable it by going to the Cloud Identity Platform page in the GCP console.
- You need to add an IdP to your Cloud Identity provider, where you can select and configure an identity provider.
- Enable Single Sign-On:
  - Users are redirected to an external IdP to authenticate
  - When users are authenticated, SAML assertions is sent to Google Sign-In
- Examples:
  - Federate Active directory with Cloud Identity by using Google Cloud Directory Sync (GCDS) and Active Directory Federation Services (ADFS).
  - Federating Azure AD with Cloud Identity

**IAM Members/Identities**

- Google Account: Represents a person (An email address)
- Service Account: Represents an application account (Not a person)
- Google Group: Represents a collection of users- Google and Service Accounts
  - Has a unique email address
  - Helps to apply access policy to a group of users
- Google Workspace Domain: Google workspace (formerly G Suite) provides collaboration services for enterprises:
  - Tools like Gmail, Calendar, Drive, Docs, Sheets, Slides, Meet, etc are included
  - If your enterprise is using Google workspace, You can manage permissions using your Google Workspace domain
- Cloud Identity Domain: Cloud Identity is an Identity as a service (IDaaS) solution that centrally manages users and groups.
  - You can use IAM to manage access to resources for each Cloud Identity account

**IAM Members/Identities- Use Cases**

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Scenario</th>
<th>Solution</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>All members in your team have G Suite accounts. You are creating a new production project and would want to provide access to your operations team.</td>
<td>Create a Group with all your operations team. Provide access to production project to the group.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>All members in your team have G Suite accounts. You are setting up a new project. You want to provide a one time quick access to a team member.</td>
<td>Assign the necessary role directly to G Suite email address of your team member. If it is not a one time quick access, the recommended approach would be to create a group.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>You want to provide an external auditor access to view all resources in your project BUT he should NOT be able to make any changes.</td>
<td>Give them roles/viewers role (Generally basic roles are NOT recommended BUT it is the simplest way to provide view only access to all resources!)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Your application deployed on a GCE VM (Project A) needs to access cloud storage bucket from a different project (Project B)</td>
<td>In Project B, assign the right role to GCE VM service account from Project A</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Organization Policy Service**

- How to enable centrailized constrains on all resources in an organization?
  - Configure Organization Policy
  - Example: Disable Creation of service accounts
  - Example: Allow/Deny creation of resources in specific regions
- Need a role: Organization Policy Administrator
- (Remember) IAM focuses on Who
  - Who can take specific actions on a resources?
- (Remember) Organization policy focuses on what
  - What can be done on specific resources?

**Resource Hierarchy and IAM Policy**

- IAM Policy can be set at any level of the resource hierarchy.
- Resource inherit the policies of all parents.
- It is like if you have a certain policy configured at Organization level, it will be inherited by all Folders, Projects and resources in those projects.
- The effective policy for a resource is the union of the policy on that resource and its parents.
- Policy inheritance is transitive:
  - For Example: Organizational policies are applied at resource level
- You can't restrict policy at a lower level if permission is given at an upper level.

**Cloud BigQuery Roles**

- Cloud BigQuery IAM roles
  - BigQuery Admin: Can do everything on BigQuery
  - BigQuery Data Owner: bigquery.datasets.*, bigquery.models.*, bigquery.routines.*, bigquery.tables.* (Does not have access to jobs)
  - BigQuery Data Editor: bigquery.tables.(Create, Delete, Export, get, getData, getIAMPolicy, list, udpate, updateData, updateTag), bigquery.models.*, bigquery.routines.*, bigquery.datasets.(create, get, getIAMPolicy, updateTag)
  - BigQuery Data Viewer: get/list bigquery.(datasets, models, routines, tables)
  - BigQuery Job User: bigquery.jobs.create
  - BigQuery User: Bigquery data viewer + get/list (jobs, capcityCommitments, reservations, etc)
- To see data, you need either bigquery User or bigquery data viewer roles
  - You CANNOT see data with bigquery job user roles
- Bigquery data owner or data viewer roles do not have access to jobs

**Corporate Directory Federation**

- Federate Cloud Identity or Google workspace with your external identity provider (IDP) such as Active Directory or Azure Active Directory.
- Enable Single Sign-On:
  - Users are redirected to an external IDP to authenticate
  - When users are authenticated, SAML assertions is sent to Google Sign-In
- Examples:
  - Use Identity as a service (IDaaS) such as Okta as IdP (Identity Provider)
    - Use IDaaS (like Okta) for SSO
  - Use Active Directory as IdP
    - Use active directory federation services (ADFS) for SSO
    - You can also user Google Cloud Directory Sync (GCDS) to synchronize users and groups from Active Directory to Cloud Identity
  - Use Azure Active Directory as IdP
    - Use Azure AD Connect for SSO

**IAM: Scenarios**

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Scenario</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>You want to give permanent access to a sub set of objects in a cloud storage bucket.</td>
<td>Use ACLs</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>You want to give permanent access to the entire bucket in a cloud storage bucket.</td>
<td>Use IAM</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>You want to provide time limited access to a specific object in a cloud storage bucket.</td>
<td>Create a signed URL</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>You want to give access to a set of resources to your development team.</td>
<td>Create a group with your development team as a member. Bind the right predefined roles to your group.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Which role? Upload pbjects to cloud storage.</td>
<td>Storage Object Creator.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Which role? Manage Kubernetes API Objects.</td>
<td>Kubernetes Engine Developer.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Which role? Manage Kubernetes API Objects.</td>
<td>Kubernetes Engine Developer.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Which role? Manage Service Accounts.</td>
<td>Service Account Admin.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Which role? View Data in BigQuery.</td>
<td>Bigquery Data Viewer.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**NOTES**

- Resource Hierarchy in GCP
  - Organization > Folders > Projects > Resources
- Google Cloud Directory Sync can be used and groups from Active Directory to Cloud Idenitity.