**Caching in Google Cloud Platform**

**What is caching?**

- This is the way to reduce the load on:
  - Your Data Stores
  - Your Servers
- How often does the data change?
  - Caching is great if the data does not change frequently.
- If you're okay with stale data?
  - Where you can specify the TTL (time to live).
- Caching Usecases:
  - Caching infrequently changing data in database
  - Caching user sessions from applications
  - Caching static content
  - Caching infrequently changing dynamic content

**MemoryStore**

- In-memory datastore service: Reduce Access times
- Fully managed (Provisioning, Replication, Failover and Patching)
  - Highly available with 99.9% availability SLA
  - Monitoring can be easily setup using Cloud Monitoring
- Support for Redis and Memcached:
  - Use Memcached for caching
    - Referance data, database query caching, session store etc
  - Use redis for low latency access with persistence and high availability
    - Gaming leader boards
- Can be accessed from:
  - Compute Engine
  - App Engine flexible and standard
  - Google Kubernetes Engine
  - Cloud Functions
- For Redis:
  - You can set the tier while creating a redis instance which can either ```Basic``` (Lower cost. Does not provide high availability) or ```Standard``` (Include a fallover replica in a seperate zone for high availability).
  - You can also choose from the redis version which you want to choose for your application, which provides a great support and help for existing and new applications at the same time, elsewise you can choose the VPC for your application which allows you control over the ingress and egress traffic from your network.
- For Memcache:
  - You can configure and set the zones and regions for your memcache instance, with the configurational advantage of choosing the number of nodes, Memory per node, Cores per node, etc.
  - In memcache the data stored is ephemeral if the node fails the data gets vanished away, that's why it is recommended to have the more number of node with lesser memory to prevent this issue.

**App Engine Memcache Service**

```
def get_data():
  data = memcache.get(key)
  if data is not None:
    return data
  else:
    data = query_for_data()
    memcached.add('key',data,60)
  return data
```

- Legacy in-memory data cache specifically for App Engine applications
  - Example Use Cases;
    - Speed Up common datastore queries
    - Caching session data and user preferences
  - This is a Temporary Storage (not backed by persistent storage)
  - Two service levels:
    - Shared memcache (FREE): Best-effort caching
    - Dedicated memcache ($$$$): Fixed cache capacity dedicated to your application
      - Predictable performance
      - Billed by the GB-hour of cache size ($0.06 per GB hour)

**Cloud CDN- Contenyt Delivery Network**

- This is a service to use Google's global edge network to serve global content with low latency
- This allows you to integrate with External HTTP(s) Load balancing.
  - LB provides frontend IP addresses and ports
- Backends can be:
  - Cloud storage buckets, Instance groups, App Engine, Cloud Run or Cloud Functions
  - Endpoints outside of Google Cloud (custom origins)
- How cloud CDN works?
  - External HTTP(S) Load balancing uses proxies- Google Front Ends (GFEs)
    - Request from user arrives at a Google Front End (GFE)
    - If url maps to a backend with cloud CDN configured:
      - If content is found in cache (cache hit), GFE sends cached response
        - Response is sent to user and cached
- When you configure the Cloud CDN you can choose the backend type from multiple options like Instance group, Zonal network endpoint group, Internet network endpoint group or Severless network endpoint group while choosing the protocol, port and timeout in Seconds.
- As you also service the Enable Cloud CDN with options like Cache static content or force cache all content addition to this you can choose the cache key with predefined and custom rules as well.
- Using TTL settings to control cache duration.

**Cloud CDN - Best practices**

- Cache static content:
  - Example: Cache Control: public, max-age=259200 (72 Hours)
- Be carefull while expiring time-sensitive (or dynamic) content
  - Smaller cached periods. Example: Cache control: public, max-age=300 (5 Minutes)
- Using custom cache keys to improve cache hit ratio
  - Default cache key- Entire url - https://yourwebsite.com/images/image1.jpg
    - cache miss - http://yourwebsite.com/images/image1.jpg (http vs https)
    - cache miss - http://yourwebsite.com/images/image1.jpg?mobile=1 (query string does not match)
  - Customized cache key- any combination of protocol, host or query string.
    - gcloud compute backend-services update BACKEND SERVICE --enable-cdn --no-cache-key-include-protocol --no-cache-key-include-host --no-cache-key-included-host --no-cache-key-include-query-string 
- Using versioned URLs to update content.
  - https://yourwebsite.com/images/image1.jpg?v=1
  - https://yourwebsite.com/images/image1.jpG?V=2
  - If you update the image you can update the URL as well which can help in better way.
  