**Agile, DevOps, SRE and SDLC**

**Software development life cycle (SDLC)- Waterfall**

- Software development in multiple long phases:
```
Requirements -->> Design -->> Implementation -->> Testing -->> Deployment
```

- Feedback loop is very slow in this model and the documentation gets up with not much use at the end.

**Software development life cycle (SDLC)- Spiral**

- Software development in smaller iterations:
  - Start
  - Iteration 1
  - Iteration 2
  - ...
```
Vision -->> Iteration -->> Iteration -->> ... -->> Iteration n -->> Product
```
- This model consists of multiple iterartions which consists of smaller tasks which can be completed quickly and as feedback is very important the feedback response becomes fast.

**Software development life cycle (SDLC)- Agile**

- Principles:
  - Individuals and interactions over processes and tools.
  - Here you focus more on software over comprehensive documentation.
  - Customer collaboration over contract negotiation.
  - Responding to change over following a plan.
  - Now there are 12 principles (https://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html)
  - The development is done in multiple sprints which makes the whole process more transparent and tracking easy.
  - The sprint consists of mostly 3-4 phases, which ranges from 1-4 weeks, where at end of every sprint we demo to the business.
- But add a bit of rigidity from waterfall model for critical safety software like Flight navigation software, Medical devices software etc).

```
Plan -->> Code -->> Build -->> Test --> Release -->> Deploy -->> Review
```

**What is DevOps**

```
Business -->> Development -->> Operations
```

- Getting better at "Three elements of Great software teams"
  - Communication- Get teams together.
  - Feedback- Earlier you find a problem, easier it is to fix.
  - Automation- Automate testing, infrastructure provisioning, deployment and monitoring.

**DevOps- CI-CD**

```
Code Commit -->> Unit tests -->> Integration Tests -->> Package -->> Deploy -->> Automation tests -->> Testing Approval -->> Deploy Next -->> ...
```

- Continuous Integration
  - Continuously run your tests and packaging
  - It is like as you commit the code you can run the tests and create a deployment package like .jar or .war or for docker image you need to make a docker image and you can deploy it to the production.
- Continyous Deployment
  - Continuously deploy to test environment
  - Addition to the above thing you need to deploy your code to some test environments where you can run the tests and see how the things are working. These tests can be either manual or automatic testing environments.
- Continuous Delivery
  - Continuously deploy to production
  - Here you deploy the code to production while working on the new features or bug fixes. Also you make multiple releases to the dev environment.
  - At some places there is a step of *Testing approval* which opts for approval for certain kind of feature roll-outs.

- Recommended Things to do:

- Static Code Analysis
  - Lint, Sonar
  - Including Static Security Checks (Source code Security Analyzer software like Veracode or Static code analyzer)
- Runtime Checks
  - Run Vulnerability Scanners (Automated tools that scan web applications for security vulnerabilities)
- Tests
  - Unit tests (JUnit, pytest, Jasmine etc)
  - Integration tests (Selenium, Robot Framework, Cucumber etc)
  - System Tests (Selenium, Robot Framework, Cucumber etc)
  - Sanity and Regression tests

**DevOps- CI, CD Tools**

- Cloud Source Repositories: Fully-featured, private git repository
  - Similar to Github
- Container Registry: Store your Docker Images
- Jenkins: Continuous Integration
- Cloud Build: Build deployable artifacts (jars or docker images) from your source code and configuration.
- Spinnaker: Multi-Cloud continuous delivery platform.
  - Release software changes with high velocity and confidence
  - Supports deployments to google compute engine, google kubernetes engine, google app engine and other cloud platforms.
  - Supports multiple deployment strategies

**DevOps- Infrastructure as Code**

```
Create Template   -->>    Provision Server   -->>    Install Software   -->>    Configure Software    -->>    Deploy Software
```

- Treat infrastructure the same way as application code.
- Track your infrastructure changes over time (version control)
- Bring repeatability into your infrastructure
- Two Key parts
  - Infrastructure Provisioning
    - Provisioning compute, databases, storage and networking
    - Open source cloud neutral- Terraform
    - GCP Service- Google cloud deployment manager
  - Configuration Management
    - Install right software and tools on the provisioned resources
    - Open source tools- Chef, Puppet, Ansible and SaltStack

**Google Cloud Deployment Manager- Introduction**

- *Example:*
  - I would want to create a new VPC and a subnet
  - I want to provision a Load Balancer, Instance groups with 5 compute engine instances and an Cloud SQL database in the subnet.
  - I would want to setup the right firewall.
- And I would want to create 4 Environments
  - Dev, QA, Stage and Production!
- Deployment manager can help you do all these with a simple (not actually so simple) script!
- It helps you to automate deployment and modification of google cloud resources in a controlled, predictable way:
  - Deploy in multiple environments easily
- Avoid configuration drift
- Avoid mistake with manual configuration
- Think of it as  version control for your environments
- Note: Always modify the resources created by Deployment manager using Deployment manager

- All configuration is defined in a simple text file- YAML
  - Configuring a VPC, a Subnet, a Database and ...
- Deployment manager understands dependencies
  - Creates VPCs first, then subnet and then the database
- (Default) Automatic rollbacks on errors (Easier to retry)
  - If creation of database fails, it would automatic delete the subnet and VPC
- Version control your configuration file and make changes to it over time.
- Free to use- Pay only for the resources provisioned
  - Get an automated estimate for your configuration

*Cloud deployment manager- Example*

```
- type: compute.v1.instance
  name: my-first-vm
  properties:
    zone: us-central1-a
    machineType: <<MACHINE_TYPE>>
    disks:
      - deviceName: boot
        type: PERSISTENT
        boot: true
        autoDelete: true
        initializeParams:
          sourceImage: <<SOURCE_IMAGE>>
      networkInterfaces:
      - network: <<NETWORK>>
        # Give instance a public IP Address
        accessConfigs:
        - name: External NAT
          type: ONE_TO_ONE_NAT
```

*Cloud deployment manager- Terminology*

- Configuration File: YAML file with resource definitions for a single deployment.
- Templates: Reusable resource definitions that can be used in multiple configuration files.
  - Can be defined using:
    - Python (preferred) OR
    - JinJa2 (recommended only for very simple scripts)
- Deployments: Collection of resources that are deployed and managed together
- Manifests: Read-Only object containing original deployment configuration (including imported templates)
  - Generated by Deployment manager
  - Includes fully-expanded resource list
  - Helpful for troubleshooting

*Cloud Marketplace (Cloud Launcher)*

- Installing custom software might involve setting up multiple resources:
  - Example: Installing wordpress needs set up of compute engine and a relational database.
- Cloud Marketplace: Central repo of easily deployable apps and datasets.
  - Similar to App Store/Play Store for mobile applications
  - You can search and install a complete stack
    - Commercial Solutions- SAP HANA etc
    - Open Source Packages- LAMP, Wordpress, Cassendra, Jenkins, etc
    - OS Licenses: BYOL, Free, Paid
    - Categories: Datasets/Developer tools/OS etc
  - When selecting a solution, you can see:
    - Components: Software, infrastructure needed etc
    - Approximate price

*Creating a wordpress Deployment*

- Name the deployment, with specifying the zones for deployment and the machine type for the same.
- You can check the box if you want to install phpMyAdmin, with specifying the boot disk type and boot disk size in GB.
- You can also specify the firewall rules with source IP ranges for HTTP and HTTPS traffic.
- You can also enable the stackdriver for monitoring and management for services, containers, applications and infrastructure. You can also check for Enable Stackdriver Logging and Monitoring.

**Site Reliability Engineering(SRE)**

- DevOps++ at Google
- SRE team focus on every aspect of an application
  - Availability, latency, performance, efficiency, change management, monitoring, emergency response, and capacity planning.
- Key Principles:
  - Manage by Service Level Objectives (SLOs)
  - Minimize Toil
  - Move fast by Reducing cost of failure
  - Share Ownership with developers

**Site Reliability Engineering(SRE)- Key Metrics**

- Service Level Indicator(SLI): Quantative measures of an aspect of a service
  - Categories: Availability, Latency, Throughput, Durability, Correctness (error rate)
  - Typically Aggregated: "Over 1 Minute"
- Service Level Objective(SLO)- SLI + Target
  - 99.99% Availability, 99.999999999% Durability
  - Response Time: 99th percentile - 1 Second
  - Choosing an appropriate SLO is complex.
- Service Level Agreement(SLA): SLO + Consequences (Contract)
  - What is the consequence of not meeting an SLO ? (Defined in a Contract)
  - Have stricter internal SLOs than external SLAs
- Error Budgets: (100% - SLO)
  - How well is a team meeting their reliability objectives?
  - How to manage development velocity

**Site Reliability Engineering (SRE)- Best Practices**

- Handeling Excess Loads
  - Load Shedding
    - API Limits
      - Different SLAs for different customers
    - Streaming Data
      - If you are aggregating time series stream data, in some scenarios, you can drop a part of data.
  - Reduce Quality of service
    - Instead of talking to a recommendations API, return a hardcoded set of products!
    - Not always possible:
      - Example: If you are making a payment
- Avoiding Cascading Failures
  - Plan to avoid thrashing
    - Circuit Breaker
    - Reduced Quality of Service

- Penetration Testing (Ethical Hacking)
  - Simulate an attack with the objective of finding security vulnerabilities
  - Should be authorized by project owners
  - No need to inform Google
    - Ensure you are only testing your projects and are in compliance with terms of service.
  - Testing can be white box (Hacker is provided with information about infrastructure and/or applications) or black box (No information is provided).
- Load Testing (JMeter, LoadRunner, Locust, Gatling etc)
  - Simulate real world traffic as closely as possible
  - Test for spiky traffic - Suddenly increases in traffic
- Resilience Testing- "How does an application behaves under stress."
- Resilience- "Ability of system to provide acceptabe behavior even when one or more parts of the system fail."
- Approaches:
  - Chaos Testing (Simian Army)- Cause one or more layers to fail
    - "Unleashing a wild monkey with a weapon in your data center to randomly shoot down instances and chew through cables."
  - Add huge stress on one of the layers
  - Include network in your testing (VPN, Cloud Interconnect etc...)
    - Do we fall back to VPN if direct interconnect fails?
    - What happens when internet is down?
  - *Best Practice:* Disaster recovery testing at Google
    - Plan and execute outages for a defined period of time

**NOTES**

- Spinnaker is a multi-cloud continuous delivery platform that supports deployments to Google Compute Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine, Google App Engine and other cloud platforms.
- Terraform is an open-source solution to provision infrastructure using Infrastructure as Code.
- Ansible or Saltstack are the tools that you can use to perform Configuration Management (Install right software and tools on the provisioned resources) on google cloud.
- Error Budgets is the metric which is used to manage deploymemt velocity in SRE.
- You can check for Load Shedding or Reduced Quality of Service is a recommended option to handelling Excess Loads.
- Simulate real world traffic as closely as possible and Test for spiky traffic - suddenly increase in traffic are the best practices with Load Testing.
- Simian Army to perform Chaos Testing is a tool that will make use of during Resilience Testing.
- Resilience Testing is the part of testing which you can run a microservice architecture on GKE and as a part of testing, and watch a node to see how the system react to it.