**Instance Groups**
- An Instance template is a group of VM instances managed as a single entity. Manage group of similar VM's having similar lifecycle as one unit.
- Instance groups let you organize VM instances or use them in a load-balancing backend service. You can even group existing instance (Creating Unmanaged Instance Groups) or create a group based on an Instance template (Creating MIGs).
There are majorly two types of Instance Groups:
1. Managed Instance Groups(MIG): Identical VMs created using an Instance template (As it is mandatory to use Instance Template over here).
    * *Features*: 
        - Auto Scaling (Increase and decrease instances based on the load): Configure auto-scaling to automatically adjust the number of instances based on the load. Here you need to define the minimum and maximum number of instances that can be created inside the MIGs. As moving forward you need to define the autoscaling metrics, where you need to define the CPU Utilization target or Load balancer Utilization target or Any other metric from the stackdriver, here in these metrics you can define the *Cool Down Period* (How long to wait before looking at auto scaling metrics again?) or the *Scale In Controls* (Preventing a sudden drop in number of VM Instances), for Example: Don't scale in by more than 10% or 3 instances in 5 minutes.
        - Auto Healing (Detect application failures using health checks and replace unhealthy instances): Configure a Health Check with initial delay(How long should you wait for your app to initialize before running a health check).
        - Managed Releases 
            - Rolling Updates: (Release new version step by step (graudually) to avoid downtime, Update a percentage of instances to the new version at a time)
            - Canary Deployment: Test new version with a group of instances before releasing it across all instances.
        - Maintain Certain number of VMs: If an instance crashes, MIG launches another instance to replace it.
        - Create instances in multiple zones (regional MIGs) (These regional MIGs provide higher availability compared to zonal MIGs)
    * Types of MIGs:
        Stateless: Automatically manage group of VMs that do stateless serving and batch processing.
        Stateful: Automatically manage groups of VMs that have persistent data or configurations (such as databases or legacy applications.)
Practise:
    * Choose the name for the MIGs and select the instance template you want to use to create the MIGs.
    * Choose from Single Zone or Multiple Zone deployment (Use deafult zone or select the zone you want to use).
    * Now you can define the autoscaling, With the different modes of autoscaling like
        - On: Add and remove instances to and from the group.
        - Scale Out: Only add instances to the group.
        - Off: Do not auto-scale the group.
      Over there you can define the minimum and maximum number of instances for autscaling of the MIGs.
    * Define the autoscaling metrics, Which use metrics to help determine when to scale the group. You can choose from the following metrics:
        - CPU Utilization: The average CPU utilization of the instances in the group. -> You can define the target CPU utilization.
        - HTTP Load Balancing Utilization: The average load balancing utilization of the instances in the group.
        - Cloud Monitoring metric: Any cloud metric that you can query in Cloud Monitoring.
    * Predictive Autoscaling: Use predictive autoscaling to predict future capacity needs based on the historical data. To ensure accuracy, predictive autoscaling will collect data about this managed instance hroup for at least 24 hours before starting to forecast its size.
    * Autoscaling Schedules: You can define the scaling schedule to scale the group up or down at specific times of the day.
    * Cooldown Period: How long to wait before looking at the auto scaling metrics again.
    * Scale in Controls: To set limits for scaling the group, as to don't scale in by more than on Some percentage of VM's over the course of some duration of time.
    * Autoscaling metrics: Here you use the metrics to help determine when to scale the group.
    * Auto Healing: Autohealing re-creates the VM instances if your application cannot be reached by the health check.
    * Health Check: You can define the health check to check the health of the instances in the group.
        - Define the name of the health check.
        - Define the protocol, port and request path.
        - For example: If you are using a HTTP Load balancer use the HTTP protocol and the port number of the HTTP protocol is 80 so define that follwed by the request path "/".
        - You can even get the logs of the health check in Cloud Logging, but this can *Increase the cost*.
        - Health Criteria: This is used to define how the health is determined for the instances in the group, the following are the parameter for the same,
            * Check Interval: Defines how often the health check is performed
            * Timeout: Defined in seconds
            * Unhealthy Threshold: Defines the number of Consecutive failures before the instance is considered unhealthy.
            * Healthy Threshold: Defines the number of Consecutive successes before the instance is considered healthy.
    * Initial Delay: The time required to boot up or the time required by VM to get ready.
2. Unmanaged Instance Groups: VMs with different configuration(VMs with different images used to create, VMs with different hardware) while staying in the same group.
    * *Features*:
        - No Auto Scaling
        - No Auto Healing
        - and other features of Managed Instance Groups
        - Not recommended: unless you need different kinds of VMs in the same group.
Demo:
    * Choose the location with region and zone.
    * Select the instaces that reside in single zone, VPC Network and Subnet. Choose the VM instance that you want to add to the instance group.
*Location* for the Instance Groups can either be Zonal or Regional. Regional gives you higher availability(**Recommended**).