**Cloud Migration Planning**

- Phase 1: Assess the workloads to be migrated.
- Phase 2: Plan the foundation.
- Phase 3: Deploy the workloads
- Phase 4: Optimize your environment

*Cloud Migration Approaches*

- You have a combination of following options:
  - Rehosting (Lift and Shift)
  - Replatforming:
    - Few adjustments to suit the cloud.
    - Example: Containerizing
  - Repurchasing:
   - Move to a new, cloud native product
  - Refactoring:
   - Example: Serverless Computing
   - Most expensive
  - Retiring
   - End of service
  - Retaining
   - Do not move to cloud
   - Stay On-Premises

*Cloud Migration Planning- Phases 1 and 2*

- Phase 1: Assess the workloads to be migrated
  - Take Inventory and Catalog apps
  - Experiment and Design proofs of concept
  - Calculate total cost of ownership
  - Choose which workloads to migrate first
    - Based on Business Value, Teams, Dependencies, Refactoring effort, Licensing and Compliance needs, Availability and Relibility requirements.
- Phase 2: Plan the foundation
  - Design Resource Organization Hierarchy, Configure IAM (Users, Groups, Integrate with Identity Provider (ldP)) and Design network topology and connectivity.
  - Plan for Security (data, apps), Monitoring (and alerting) and Governance
  - Plan your migration team.
- Phase 3: Deploy the workloads
  - Migrate Data
    - Consider Cost, Time, Offline versus online transfer options and Security
  - Deploy Applications
  - Prefer Automation:
    - Automate configuration management with Ansible, Chef or Puppet
    - Automate build and deployment using Jenkins, SonarQube, Cloud Build or Spinnaker
    - Implement Infrastructure as Code using Terraform or Deployment manager
- Phase 4: Optimize your environment
  - Ensure that logging, monitoring and alerting are in place.
  - Reduce overhead by preffering managed services.
  - Optimize costs using autoscaling

*Database Migration- MS SQL Server to GCP*

- Cloud SQL for SQL Server is fully managed
- Migration Steps
  - Create a Cloud SQL for SQL server instance
  - Move backup of your database to Cloud Storage
  - Import the database into Cloud SQL for SQL server
  - Validate the imported data
- Migration- Deploying Containers to GCP*

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Option</th>
<th>Details</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>App Engine Flexible Environment</td>
<td>Highly scalable BUT cannot scale down to ZERO

Doesn't let you customize underlying Compute Engine VMs

Very Less Management Burden</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cloud Run and Cloud Run for Anthos</td>
<td>Highly scalable AND You can scale down to zero instances

Cannot customize the environment

Almost ZERO management burden.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) and Anthos Clusters</td>
<td>Higly Scalable

You need to manage the clusters.

You can customize cluster nodes as per your needs</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Compute Engine</td>
<td>You can use Container-Optimized OS (COS) image with docker installed

gcloud compute instances create-with-container VM_NAME --container-image DOCKER_IMAGE

Launches your container on startup of VM

NOT Recommended: You need to manage everything: Scalability, Availability, Load Balancing, etc.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>