**Cloud Architect Responsibilities**

*Architect: Understand Business Requirements*

- Business Requirements: Define what your business needs
- Example of Business Requiremenets:
  - Reduce costs (Understand Capital Expenditure vs Operational Expenditure)
    - Managed Services
    - Autoscaling
    - Premptible VMs: If you need time bound workloads
  - Increase pace of innovation
    - Evaluate and adopt emerging processes like DevOps (CI/CD) and SRE
    - Evaluate and adopt emerging architectures like microservices
  - Reduce mean time to recovery
  - Improve compliance with regulations
  - More visibility into applications and infrastructure (metrics)
  - More intelligence from the available data

*Architect: KPI for Business Requirements*

- How can you measure if you are meeting business objectives?
- Define KPIs (Key Performance Indicator) where possible:
  - How is the business doing with respect to an objective?
  - Project KPIs:
    - Example: Number of new customers in a week
    - Example: Percentage of virtual machines running in the cloud
  - Operational KPIs
    - Example: Operational cost per customer

*Total Cost of Ownership (TCP)*

- Total cost of ownership (TCO) includes:
  - Licensing Costs (Software + Hardware)
  - Computing Costs
  - Storage Costs
  - Networking Costs (Connection Cost + Data Ingress + Data Egress)
  - Personal Costs (Dev + Test + Ops + Business + ...)
  - Other Costs
    - Penalties for missed SLAs or Compliance needs
    - Third party APIs
    - ...

*Defining Technical Requirements*

- Technical aspects that your system must adhere to
  - Functional:
    - Must use Containers
    - Must use hardened Linux OS
    - Needs container orchestration
    - Must be autoscaling
    - Must be No-SQL database with flexible schema
    - Able to store huge volumes of archives at very low cost
    - Must use a private network (traffic should not go over internet)
  - Non Functional:
    - Availability
    - Scalability
    - Durability
    - Security

*Planning for High Availabilty*

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Service / Feature</th>
<th>Features / Best Practices</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Geographical Distribution</td>
<td>Availablity: Global > Multi-Regional > Regional > Zonal</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Compute Engine</td>
<td>Live Migration

Managed Instance Groups with Autoscaling and Health Checks (Auto Healing)

Distribute Instances across regions/zones and distribute using Global Load Balancing.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>GKE</td>
<td>Multi-Master, Regional Clusters with pod and cluster autoscaling.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Managed Services</td>
<td>Use managed services like App Engine, Cloud Functions, Cloud Storage, Cloud Filestore, Cloud Datastore, BigQuery</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Persistent Disks</td>
<td>Live Resizing improves availability

Use regional persistent disks</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cloud Bigtable</td>
<td>Place clusters in different zones or regions (Each cluster belong to a zone and you can create multiple clusters for high availability in the same instance)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cloud Datastore</td>
<td>Use Multi- Region locations</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cloud SQL</td>
<td>Use HA Configuration (regional)- clusters with primary instance and a standby instance is created.

Read replicas will NOT be promoted (So Read Replicas do NOT increase availability for Cloud SQL)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Network Tier</td>
<td>Prefer premium Network Tier to standard network tier</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Hybrid Network Connecivity</td>
<td>Speed and Availability: Dedicated Interconnect > Partner Interconnect > VPN

Have a backup Connection

Example: VPN can be a backup for dedicated interconnect or have multiple Dedicated interconnect connections.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

*Planning for Scalability*

- Highly Scalable Compute Engine Architecture: VMs in MIG configured by instance template (and load balanced with load balancing).
  - (Remember) Unmanaged Instance Groups do not support Auto Scaling
- Use Pod and Cluster Autoscaling for GKE.
- Be cautious with resources that cannot scale fast.
  - Cloud SQL does NOT scale horizontally (only Vertically)
- Stateful applications are more difficult to scale than stateless applications
  - You can move state to a cache (like memorystore) or a database.
- Persistent Disks: Can be scaled horizontally and vertically
  - You can increase the size of PD while it is attached to a VM.
  - You can attach new PDs (Upto a max of 128) while a VM is running
- Compute:
  - Cloud Storage, App Engine and Cloud Functions are serverless (Auto Scaling)
- Databases:
  - Pub/Sub, BigQuery and Cloud Datastore are serverless (Auto Scaling)
  - Bigtable, Cloud Spanner, Cloud SQL, Dataproc are not serverless.
    - You need to choose the number of nodes in the cluster (and also the type of node for Cloud SQL and Dataproc)

*Planning for Security*

- Confidentiality: Only right people have the right access
  - Follow the IAM best Practices
  - Encryption at rest and in transit (along with physical controls)
    - (Default) GCP encrypts all data at rest
- Integrity: Protect data from unauthorized change
  - Follow the IAM best Practices
    - RBAC: Role based access control
    - Separation of duties
  - Hash Verifications and Digital Signatures
- Availability: Systems/Data is/are available when users need them.
  - Solutions: Firewalls, Redundancy, Automatic Failover etc
  - Protect them from Denial of Service (DOS) attacks
- (DDoS) attack: Attempting to bring your apps down with large scale attacks
- Shared Responsibility between GCP and Customer
  - GCP provides certain features to protect you from DDoS attack
    - Anti-Spoofing protection for the private network
    - Isolation between Virtual Network
    - App Engine (Sits behind google front end) automatically protects you from layer 4 and below attacks.
      - Example: SYN floods, IP Fragment floods, port exhaustion, etc.
  - What you can do to protect apps from DDoS attacks?
    - Reduce the attack surface: Make use of subnetworks, firewall rules and IAM.
    - Isolate your internal traffic
      - Use private IP address (Unless you need Public IP addresses)
      - Use private load balancing for internal traffic
    - Use proxy based load balancing: Automatically protects you from Layer 4 and below attacks.
    - Integrate load balancing with cloud armor
      - IP based and geo based access controls
      - Enhance layer 7 security policies on hybrid and multi-cloud deployments.
      - Pre configured WAF rules (OWASP Top 10)

*Digital Signatures- Cloud KMS*

- A digital signature is used to check if the data is coming in from the right sender.
- When do you use Digital Signatures:
  - Purpose 1: Verification of the integrity of the signed data
  - Purpose 2: Non-repudiation if the signer claims the signature is not authentic
    - Sender cannot deny sending the message later
- Workflow:
  - Sender perfoms private key operation over the data to create a digital signature
  - Recipient uses the public key to verify the digital signature
    - If verification is unsuccessful, then the data has been altered
- Cloud KMS can be used to create an asymmetric key pair (public and private key pair) that supports digital signing
  - Provides APIs/Commands to create digital signatures
    - gcloud kms asymmetric-sign
- Usecase: Validating Cloud builds.

*Cloud Armor*

- Cloud Armor: Protects your apps from denial of service and OWASP Top 10 attacks.
  - Protects you from common web attacks (OWASP top 10) like XSS (Cross Site Scripting) and SQL Injection.
  - Protect applications deployed in Google cloud, in a hybrid environment, or a multi-cloud architecture
    - Integrates very well with Google cloud load balancing
  - Provides preconfigured security policies (OWASP Top 10 risks etc)
    - Customize rules as per your needs
  - Usecases
    - Enable access for users at specific IP addresses with allowlists
    - Block access for users at specific IP addresses with denylists
    - Protect applications against OWASP Top 10 risks

*Secret Manager*

- How do you manage your database passwords, your API keys securely?

```
SecretVersionName secretVersionName = SecretVersionName.of(projectId, secretId, versionId);
AccessSecretVersionResponse response = client.accessSecretVersion(secretVersionName);
String secretValue = response.getPayload().getData().toStringUtf8();
```

- Secret Manager - Store API keys, passwords etc
  - Multiple versions of secrets
  - Automation rotation with Cloud Functions
  - Auditing with Cloud Audit logs
  - Encrypted by default
- Best Practice: Do NOT store credential/passwords in code
  - Use secret manager and access secrets in your application

*Architect Responsibilities: Stakeholder Management*

- Stakeholder: "a person with an interest or concern in something"
  - Different stakeholders have different priorities/interests/degrees of influence:
    - CEO/CTO
    - Business Process Owner
    - Product Owner
    - Architecture Team
    - Scrum Master
    - Development Team
    - Testing Team
    - Security Team
    - Compliance Team
- As an architect, you need to understand the needs of different stakeholders and design solutions that meet them.
  - Key to stakeholder management: Early clear communication
    - Identify stakeholders, their interests and build a plan to effectively communicate with them.

*Architect Responsibilities: Change Management*

```
v------------------------------------------------<
|                                                |
---> Plan  -->   Do  -->   Check   -->   Act   --^
```

- Changes are inevitable
  - People, Process and Technology (systems, hardware and software)
  - But humans hate change
- Change Management: How do you deal with changes and reduce impact?
  - Understand the change
    - Reason: Why make the change?
    - Risks: What are the risks?
    - Resources: Who is impacted? Who can help make the change? What is needed?
    - Responsibility: Who can make it happen?
  - Follow the cycle: Plan - Do - Check - Act

*Architect Responsibilities: Business Continuity Planning*

- BCP: How to keep business running in face of disasters?
- Disaster Recovery: Parts of BCP focused IT Operations
  - Example: Use cloud/on-prem as DR environment
  - Example: Have a backup network connection between cloud and on-prem
  - Disaster Recovery Plan: How should an enterprise respond to different types of disasters?
    - Includes People, Process and Technology (Systems, Hardware and Software)
    - Identifies critical services, personnel and plans
    - Define Recovery Time Objective (RTO) and Recovery Point Objective (RPO)
      - Design and architect your solutions to meet your RTO and RPO objectives
    - DR plans should be continuously tested (Game Days)
      - Are you able to restore database from archive?
- BCP= Disaster recovery plan (Restore critical IT applications and systems) + Business Recovery (Restore critical business processes)
  - Example: Outsourcing
  - Example: Temporary Office Space

*Architect Responsibilities: Incident Management*

- Incident: "Unplanned event that causes a service disruption"
- Goal: "How to avoid incidents?" and "How to react to incidents quickly?"
- How to avoid incidents?
  - Monitoring and Alerting
    - Examples: Alerts: Free disk space in storage/databases, CPU Utilization, Size of message queue
  - Programming best practices:
    - Retry with exponential backoff
- How to react to incidents quickly?
  - Monitoring (Logging, Tracing, Debugging, Metrics, Dashboards)
  - Being prepared (Game days)
- Post-mortem:
  - Goal: How to prevent a repeat of the incident?
    - Goal is NOT "Whom to Blame?"

*Architect Responsibilities: Data Management*

- Managing Data and its flow is a very important responsibilities
  - How does data come in? (Stream or batch or transactional application)
    - if you have plans to move from batch to stream, prefer cloud dataflow.
  - What rate will we receive data?
    - Plan for scaling storage (prefer auto scaling storage like Cloud Storage)
  - What kind of data? (archive or ..)
  - How much data? (GB, TB or PB)
  - For how long?
    - Cloud Storage Lifecycle policies and detention policies
    - Table Expiration
  - Who will have access?
  - How will you use the data?
    - Ideally keep data and data processing system in same zone (or atleast in the same region)
    - If you are not planning to use the data for a long time, use cloud storage archive storage class 