**Compute Engine and Load Balancing for Architects**

- Availability
  - This is the percentage of time an application provides the operations expected out of it.
    - Example: 99.99% availability. Also called four 9's availability.
  - Availability is more about the applications availability when users need them.
    - Availability of 99.95% comes with roughly 22 minutes of downtime in a month.
    - Availability of 99.99% comes with roughly 4 and half minutes of downtime in a month. This is about the most online applications aim for 99.99%(four 9's) availability.
    - Availability of 99.999% comes with just 26 seconds of downtime in a month. Where achieving 5.9's availability is very difficult.

- High Availability Architecture for compute engine and Load balancing
  - Multiple regional instance groups for each microservice.
  - Distribute load using a global HTTP(S) load balancer.
  - Configure health checks for instacne group and load balancing. (Providing ease to replace)
  - Enable live migration for VM instances.
  - Advantages:
    - Instances distributed across multiple regions. (You can have better fault tolerance like if your one zone region goes down, you can still have your application running in another region.)
    - Global load balancing is highly available.
    - Health checks ensure that only healthy instances are added to the load balancer and replacing with healthy instance when needed.

- Scalability
  - Can we handle a growth in users, traffic, or data size without any drop in performance?
  - Does ability to serve more growth increase the popularity with resources? Like there is a sudden increase to some application and it is required to scale up.
  - Ability to adapt to changes in demand(based on users and data).
  - What can be the options for doing so,
    - You can deploy to a bigger instance with bigger CPU and more amount of memory.
    - You can also increase the number of application instances and setup a load balancer.

- **Vertical Scaling** (Increasing the size of the instance)
  - Vertical scaling is the process in which we deploy application/database to a bigger instance where it can be A larger hard drive, A faster CPU, or more memory or networking capabilities.
  - There are certain limits to the Vertical Scaling, there is a limit to how much CPU can you have.

- **Horizontal Scaling** (Increasing the number of instances)
  - Deploying multiple instances of application/database, here instead of having single database you can distribute the data across multiple servers.
  - Typically, Horizontal scaling is preferred to Vertical scaling.
    - Vertical Scaling has limits.
    - Vertical Scaling can be expensive.
    - Horizontal Scaling increases availability.
  - (As of) Horizontal scaling needs additional infrastructure: load balancers, etc.

- Vertical scaling for GCE VMs
  - For understanding the vertical scaling in GCE, You will be increasing the VM machine size or you can go from one machine family to another machine family or add GPU or TPU to your VM.
  - Before you do change in machine type you need to stop the machine and then change the machine type and then start the machine again.

- Horizontal scaling for GCE VMs
  - Distribute VM instances:
    - In a single zone.
    - In multiple zones in single region.
    - In multiple zones across multiple regions.
  - Auto Scale: Managed instance groups.
  - Distribute Load: Cloud Load Balancing

- Compute Engine: Live migration and Available Policy
  - It is a certain condition where your VMs are running while your host machine needs to be updated.
  - Live Migration:
    - Your instances running is migrated to another host in the same zone as of your VMs.
    - Does not change any attributes or properties of your VMs.
    - SUPPORTED for instances with local SSDs.
    - NOT SUPPORTED for GPUs and preemptible instances.
  - Available Policy: Here you can configure the live migration policy for your VMs.
    - On Host maintenance: This is where you will configure, as what should happen during the periodic infrastructure maintenance.
      - Migrate (*Default*): Migrate your VMs to another host or to the other hardware.
      - Terminate: Stop your VM instances.
    - Automatic Restart: Restart VM instances if they are terminated due to non-user-initiated reasons (maintainence alerts. hardware failures, etc.).
  - Note: You can find these options while creating instance in Management, Security, Disks, Networking, Sole Tenancy, where you can find the option for Available Policy.

- Compute Engine Features:
  - You can use GPUs as an add for your workloads to increase your math intensive and graphics intensive workloads.
  - There is always a cost involved while using any hardware, so here the cost of using GPUs is higher.
  - Use images with GPU libraries(for Deep Learnining) pre-installed.
  - GPU restrictions:
    - GPUs are not supported for all types of machines (For example: Shared core or memory optimized machines).
    - On host maintainence can only have the value "Terminate VM instance".
  - Recommended Availability Policy for instances with GPUs:
    - Automatic restart: On

- Security:
  - Define Firewall rules to restrict traffic to your instances.
  - **Ingress:** Traffic coming into your instance.
  - **Egress:** Traffic going out of your instance.
  - Use Internal IP addresses as much as possible.
  - Use sole-tenant nodes when you have regulatory needs.
  - Create a hardened custom image to launch your VMs.

- Performance:
  - Use the right machine type for your workload. (Like if you are running a cache you will need a lot of memory or if you have a lot of computation workload then you will need a lot of CPUs.).
  - You can use GPUs or TPUs to increase the performance of your workloads.
    - Use GPUs to accelerate machine learning and data processing workloads.
    - Use TPUs for massive matrix operations performed in your machine learning workloads.
  - Prefer creating a hardened custom image to installing software at startup, which will be faster than usual with this process.

- Resiliency:
  - *Ability of system to provide acceptable behavior even when one or more parts of the whole system gets failed.*
  - For example, If your two instances are in two different regions and you're using cloud load balancing to deliver the services, in this situation if one region goes down, your application will still be available in another region.
  - Building resilient architectures: This can be achieved by Running VMs in behind global load balancing.
  - Have the right data available: You can use Cloud Monitoring for monitoring of your application for metrics and logs. This can be more compositely done by installing the logging agent to send logs to cloud logging.
  - You always need to be prepared for the unexpected (and the changes): You can use Live Migration by enabling it and automatic restarting when the feature is available. You can also configure the Health Checks for your resources. (Disaster Recovery) Upto date image copied to multiple regions which will have your data backed up at multiple geographical locations.

- Sustained Use Discount:
  - This is an automatic discount for running VM instances for significant portion of the billing month. Example: If you use N1, N2 machine types for more than 25% of the billing month, you can get a chance to get a discount of 20% to 50% discount on every incremental minute.
  - Discount increases with usage and you don't need to do anything to get this discount.
  - This is applicable for Instances created by GKE and GCE.
  - It does not apply (Restricted) on certain machine type that include E2 and A2 machine types. It also does not apply to VMs created by App Engine Flexible and Dataflow.

- Committed Use Discounts:
  - This is for the workloads with predicatable resource needs.
  - Commit for certain long duration amount of time like 1 year or 3 years.
  - This can get you upto 70% discount based on machine type and GPUs.
  - This is applicable for Instances created by GKE and GCE.
  - It does not apply (Restricted) on certain machine type that include E2 and A2 machine types. It also does not apply to VMs created by App Engine Flexible and Dataflow.
  - For this you need to go to the Compute Engine and find the option for "Committed Use Discounts" and then you can select either to Purchase Commitment or Create Reservation.

- Preemptible VMs:
  - Short-lived cheaper(Upto 80% cheaper) compute instances.
    - Can be stopped or terminated by GCP anytime (preempted) within 24 hours.
    - You will be getting 30 Seconds warning before the instance is preempted. (This time is for you to save anything that you want to save).
  - Use Preempt VMs if:
    - Your applications are fault tolerant or can have some issues with them.
    - You are very cost sensitive.
    - Your workload is not immediate.
    - Example: Non immediate batch processing jobs
  - Restrictions:
    - These types of instances are not always available.
    - No SLA and cannot be migrated to the regular instances.
    - You cannot automatically restart preemptible instances.
    - Free Tier credits are not applicable for preemptible instances.
    - For creating one preemptible VM you need to create a VM instance and then select the option for "Preemptible" and mark it as "On" and create the instance.