**Gcloud**

- Gcloud is a command line tool to interact with google cloud resources.
- Most services can be managed from CLI using gcloud.
  - Compute Engine Virtual Machines
  - Managed instance groups
  - Databases and much more.
- You can create/delete/update/read existing resources and perform actions like deployments as well!!!
- (Remember) Some GCP services have specific CLI tools:
  - Cloud Storage - gsutil
  - Cloud BigQuery - bq
  - Cloud Bigtable - cbt
  - Kubernetes - kubectl(In addition to gcloud which is used to manage clusters).
- Gcloud is part of Google Cloud SDK(Software Development Kit).
  - Cloud SDK requires python to be installed on our machine.
  - You can use gcloud from Cloud Shell.

**Connecting to GCP**

- *gcloud init*: Initialize or reinitialize gcloud.
  - Authorize gcloud to use your user account credentials.
  - This also allows you to setup configurations for gcloud.
    - Includes current project, default zone, etc.
- *gcloud config list*: List all properties of the active configuration.

**gcloud command structure-Playing with services**

- *gcloud GROUP SUBGROUP ACTION ...*
  - GROUP: config or compute or container or dataflow or functions or iam or ... (This is the service group with whom you're playing with.)
  - SUBGROUP: instances or images or instance-templates or machine-types or regions or zones (This is the sub-group of the service do you want to play with.)
  - ACTION: create or list or start or stop or describe or ... (This is the action you want to perform on the sub-group.)
    - Example: *gcloud compute instances list*
      - In the above command gcloud is the command intialization, compute is the GROUP, instances is the SUBGROUP and list is the ACTION.

**Examples**

- gcloud compute instances list
- gcloud compute zones list
- gcloud compute regions list
- gcloud compute machine-types list
- gcloud compute machine-types list --filter="zone:us-central1-a"
- gcloud compute machine-types list --filter="zone:(us-central1-b europe-west1-b)"

**Important Things to Remember**

- Cloud shell is backed by a VM instance (automatically provisioned by google cloud when you launch cloud shell).
  - 5GB of persistent disk space is provided as your home directory.
  - Prepakaged with the latest version of Cloud SDK, Docker, etc.
  - (Remember) Files in your home directory persist between sessions (Scripts, user configuration files like .bashrc, and .vimrc, etc).
  - Provisioned instance is terminated if you are inactive for more than 20 minutes.
- Cloud shell can be used to SSH into the VM instances using their private IP addresses.