**IAAS (Infrastructure as a Service)**

- Use only the infrastructure from cloud-provider.
  - Example: Using VM to deploy your applications or databases.
- You are responsible for,
  - Application code and runtime
  - Configuring load balancing
  - Auto Scaling of resources
  - OS upgrades and patches
  - Availability and a lot of things.

**PAAS (Platform as a Service)**

- Use a platform from cloud-provider.
  - Example: Using App Engine to deploy your applications.
- Cloud-provider is responsible for,
  - OS (including patches and upgrades)
  - Application Runtime
  - Auto Scaling, Availability, and Load Balancing etc.
- Here you are responsible for,
  - Application code
  - Configuring the application and services
- Example: Google App Engine, AWS Elastic Beanstalk, Azure App Service, etc.
- Varieties:
  - CAAS (Containers as a Service): Container instead of apps
  - FAAS (Functions as a Service): Functions instead of apps
  - Databases- Relational & No SQL (Amazon RDS, Google Cloud SQL, Azure SQL Database etc.), Queues, AI, ML, Operations, etc.

**Microservices**

- Enterprises are heading towards the microservice architectures.
  - Building small focused micro-services
  - This provides flexibility to innovate and build applications in different programming languages (Go, Java, Python, Javascript, etc).
  - A drawback is that the deployment and management of these microservices is complex.

**Container- Docker**

- Create Docker images for each microservice.
- Docker image has all the needs of a microservice.
  - Application Runtime (JDK or Python or NodeJS)
  - Application code and dependencies
- These containers runs the same way on any infrastructure.
  - Your local machine
  - Corporate data center
  - Cloud
- Advantages
  - Docker containers are lightweight
    - Compared to VMs as they don't have Guest OS
  - Docker provides isolation for containers
  - Docker is cloud neutral

**Container Orchestration**

-(Requirement): i want 10 instances of Microservice A container, 15 instances of Microservice B container and so on ...
- Typical Features:
  - Auto Scaling: Scale containers based on demand and need.
  - Service Discovery: This helps the microservices to find one another.
  - Load Balancer: It distributes the load among multiple instances of a microservice.
  - Self Healing: Do health checks and replace the failing instances. (Resiliency)
  - Zero downtime deployments: Release new versions without downtime.

**Serverless**

- Serverless is a cloud computing execution model in which you don't need to worry about servers and focus on your application code. Here the concepts of scaling, availability, and load balancing are handled by the cloud provider.
- Serverless does not means "No Servers'.
- As you don't need to worry about servers, these invisible servers with zero visibility to the infrastructure provides flexible scaling and automated high availability.
- The most important thing about serverless is pay for use, if ideally ZERO REQUESTS, then ZERO COST.
- Here you can focus on your code and cloud managed service takes care of all that is needed to scale your code to serve million of requests. In serverless model you pay for requests not for the infrastructure or servers.
- Example: AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, Azure Functions, etc.

**GCP managed service for Compute**

- *Compute Engine*: IaaS : High performance and general purpose VMs that scale globally.
- *Google Kubernetes Engine*: CaaS : Orchestrate containerized microservices on Kubernetes. This needs advanced cluster configuration and monitoring.
- *App Engine*: PaaS(CaaS Serverless) : Build highly scalable applications on a fully managed platform using open and familier languages and tools. App engine standard can go upto 0 instances if there is no request for a long time duration.
- *Cloud Functions*: FaaS, Serverless : Build event driven applications using simple, single purpose functions.
- *Cloud Run*: CaaS, Serverless : Develop and deploy highly scalable containerized applications. This does not need a Cluster. If you have simpler architecture and simple cluster applications you can go with Cloud Run for sure.

Notes:
- For migrating a custom C++ application running on a customized linux VM as-in to Google Cloud, you can use Compute Engine.
- Google Kubernetes Engine is the managed container orchestration service in google cloud.
- Cloud Function can be used to build event driven applications using simple, single purpose function in google cloud.
- Compute Engine is the service used to create google cloud services which is used to create high-performance and general-purpose VMs that scale globally.