**Google Cloud Functions**

**Cloud Functions**

- Run code in response to the events.
  - Write your business logic in Node.js, Python, Java, Go, .NET and Ruby.
  - Don't worry about servers or scaling or availability (only worry about your code).
- Pay only for what you use
  - Number of invocations
  - Compute time of the invocations
  - Memory and CPU provisioned
- Time Bound: Default 1 min and MAX 60 min (3600 sec).
- Two Product Versions:
  - Cloud Functions (1st Gen): First Version.
  - Cloud Functions (2nd Gen): New version built on top of cloud run and eventarc.

**Cloud Functions-Concepts**

- Event: Upload object to cloud storage.
- Trigger: Respond to event with a function call.
  - Trigger- Which function to trigger when an event happens?
  - Event- Take event data and perform the actions?
- Event are triggered from
  - Cloud Storage
  - Cloud Pub/Sub : Queueing Service
  - HTTP POST/GET/DELETE/PUT/OPTIONS
  - Firebase
  - Cloud Firestore
  - Stack driver logging

**Cloud Functions**

- Google Cloud Functions is a lightweight, event-based, asynchronous compute solution that allows you to create small, single-purpose functions that respond to cloud events without the need to manage a server or a runtime environment.
- If the cloud function has not completed by the timeout duration, then the function will be terminated. The default timeout duration is 60 seconds. The maximum timeout duration is 9 mins (540 seconds).(Version1)
- Maximum support of memory is 8GB (Version1).
- Configure the function name, region, runtime, and memory.
- Configure the triggers like trigger type and select the authentication method. You can also configure whether you want to allow HTTPs traffic to the function.
- On the next screen you can configure the function code. You can also configure the timeout duration, maximum instances, and the maximum number of concurrent executions.
- For using the cloud function, you need to create a service account and assign the required roles to the service account and enable the required APIs like Cloud build API.
- Create the cloud function.
- If you click on the function you can check all the details and check the logs. Even you can test your function by clicking on the test button.
- You can also edit the function on the go and it will automatically update the function.